CHAPTER 21
Circuits and DC Instruments

FIGURE 21.1 Electric circuits in computers and servers allow large amounts of data to be quickly and accurately analyzed. (credit:
WOCinTech Chat/Flickr)

CHAPTER OUTLINE

21.1 Resistors in Series and Parallel

21.2 Electromotive Force: Terminal Voltage

21.3 Kirchhoff’s Rules

21.4 DC Voltmeters and Ammeters

21.5 Null Measurements

21.6 DC Circuits Containing Resistors and Capacitors

INTRODUCTION TO CIRCUITS AND DC INSTRUMENTS
as those in flashlights. Others, such as those used in supercomputers, are extremely complex.

Electric circuits are commonplace. Some are simple, such

This collection of modules takes the topic of electric circuits a step beyond simple circuits. When the circuit is purely
resistive, everything in this module applies to both DC and AC. Matters become more complex when capacitance is
involved. We do consider what happens when capacitors are connected to DC voltage sources, but the interaction of
capacitors and other nonresistive devices with AC is left for a later chapter. Finally, a number of important DC
instruments, such as meters that measure voltage and current, are covered in this chapter.

904

21 • Circuits and DC Instruments

21.1 Resistors in Series and Parallel

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

• Draw a circuit with resistors in parallel and in series.
• Calculate the voltage drop of a current across a resistor using Ohm’s law.
• Contrast the way total resistance is calculated for resistors in series and in parallel.
• Explain why total resistance of a parallel circuit is less than the smallest resistance of any of the resistors

in that circuit.

• Calculate total resistance of a circuit that contains a mixture of resistors connected in series and in

parallel.

Most circuits have more than one component, called a resistor that limits the flow of charge in the circuit. A
measure of this limit on charge flow is called resistance. The simplest combinations of resistors are the series and
parallel connections illustrated in Figure 21.2. The total resistance of a combination of resistors depends on both
their individual values and how they are connected.

FIGURE 21.2 (a) A series connection of resistors. (b) A parallel connection of resistors.

Resistors in Series

When are resistors in series? Resistors are in series whenever the flow of charge, called the current, must flow
through devices sequentially. For example, if current flows through a person holding a screwdriver and into the
Earth, then

in Figure 21.2(a) could be the resistance of the screwdriver’s shaft,

the resistance of its handle,

the person’s body resistance, and

the resistance of her shoes.

Figure 21.3 shows resistors in series connected to a voltage source. It seems reasonable that the total resistance is
the sum of the individual resistances, considering that the current has to pass through each resistor in sequence.
(This fact would be an advantage to a person wishing to avoid an electrical shock, who could reduce the current by
wearing high-resistance rubber-soled shoes. It could be a disadvantage if one of the resistances were a faulty high-
resistance cord to an appliance that would reduce the operating current.)

FIGURE 21.3 Three resistors connected in series to a battery (left) and the equivalent single or series resistance (right).

To verify that resistances in series do indeed add, let us consider the loss of electrical power, called a voltage drop,
in each resistor in Figure 21.3.

According to Ohm’s law, the voltage drop,
the equation

, where equals the current in amps (A) and

is the resistance in ohms

. Another way to

, across a resistor when a current flows through it is calculated using

Access for free at openstax.org

think of this is that

is the voltage necessary to make a current

flow through a resistance .

21.1 • Resistors in Series and Parallel

905

is
So the voltage drop across
of these voltages equals the voltage output of the source; that is,

, that across

is

, and that across

is

. The sum

21.1

This equation is based on the conservation of energy and conservation of charge. Electrical potential energy can be
described by the equation
the source is

, while that dissipated by the resistors is

is the voltage. Thus the energy supplied by

, where is the electric charge and

21.2

Connections: Conservation Laws

The derivations of the expressions for series and parallel resistance are based on the laws of conservation of
energy and conservation of charge, which state that total charge and total energy are constant in any process.
These two laws are directly involved in all electrical phenomena and will be invoked repeatedly to explain both
specific effects and the general behavior of electricity.

These energies must be equal, because there is no other source and no other destination for energy in the circuit.
Thus,
, as stated. (Note that the same
amount of charge passes through the battery and each resistor in a given amount of time, since there is no
capacitance to store charge, there is no place for charge to leak, and charge is conserved.)

. The charge cancels, yielding

Now substituting the values for the individual voltages gives

Note that for the equivalent single series resistance

, we have

21.3

21.4

This implies that the total or equivalent series resistance

of three resistors is

.

This logic is valid in general for any number of resistors in series; thus, the total resistance
is

of a series connection

21.5

as proposed. Since all of the current must pass through each resistor, it experiences the resistance of each, and
resistances in series simply add up.

EXAMPLE 21.1

Calculating Resistance, Current, Voltage Drop, and Power Dissipation: Analysis of a Series
Circuit
Suppose the voltage output of the battery in Figure 21.3 is

, and the resistances are

,

, and

. (a) What is the total resistance? (b) Find the current. (c) Calculate the voltage drop
in each resistor, and show these add to equal the voltage output of the source. (d) Calculate the power dissipated by
each resistor. (e) Find the power output of the source, and show that it equals the total power dissipated by the
resistors.

Strategy and Solution for (a)

The total resistance is simply the sum of the individual resistances, as given by this equation:

21.6

906

21 • Circuits and DC Instruments

Strategy and Solution for (b)

The current is found using Ohm’s law,
yields the current for the circuit:

Strategy and Solution for (c)

. Entering the value of the applied voltage and the total resistance

21.7

21.8

21.9

21.10

21.11

,

drop—in a resistor is given by Ohm’s law. Entering the current and the value of the first

The voltage—or
resistance yields

Similarly,

and

Discussion for (c)

The three

drops add to

, as predicted:

Strategy and Solution for (d)

The easiest way to calculate power in watts (W) dissipated by a resistor in a DC circuit is to use Joule’s law,
where
Ohm’s law

is electric power. In this case, each resistor has the same full current flowing through it. By substituting

into Joule’s law, we get the power dissipated by the first resistor as

Similarly,

and

Discussion for (d)

21.12

21.13

21.14

Power can also be calculated using either

or

, where

is the voltage drop across the resistor (not

the full voltage of the source). The same values will be obtained.

Strategy and Solution for (e)

The easiest way to calculate power output of the source is to use

, where

is the source voltage. This gives

21.15

Discussion for (e)

Note, coincidentally, that the total power dissipated by the resistors is also 7.20 W, the same as the power put out
by the source. That is,

21.16

Power is energy per unit time (watts), and so conservation of energy requires the power output of the source to be
equal to the total power dissipated by the resistors.

Access for free at openstax.org

21.1 • Resistors in Series and Parallel

907

Major Features of Resistors in Series

1. Series resistances add:
2. The same current flows through each resistor in series.
3.

Individual resistors in series do not get the total source voltage, but divide it.

Resistors in Parallel

Figure 21.4 shows resistors in parallel, wired to a voltage source. Resistors are in parallel when each resistor is
connected directly to the voltage source by connecting wires having negligible resistance. Each resistor thus has the
full voltage of the source applied to it.

Each resistor draws the same current it would if it alone were connected to the voltage source (provided the voltage
source is not overloaded). For example, an automobile’s headlights, radio, and so on, are wired in parallel, so that
they utilize the full voltage of the source and can operate completely independently. The same is true in your house,
or any building. (See Figure 21.4(b).)

FIGURE 21.4 (a) Three resistors connected in parallel to a battery and the equivalent single or parallel resistance. (b) Electrical power
setup in a house. (credit: Dmitry G, Wikimedia Commons)

To find an expression for the equivalent parallel resistance

, let us consider the currents that flow and how they

are related to resistance. Since each resistor in the circuit has the full voltage, the currents flowing through the
individual resistors are

. Conservation of charge implies that the total current

, and

,

produced by the source is the sum of these currents:

908

21 • Circuits and DC Instruments

Substituting the expressions for the individual currents gives

Note that Ohm’s law for the equivalent single resistance gives

21.17

21.18

21.19

The terms inside the parentheses in the last two equations must be equal. Generalizing to any number of resistors,
the total resistance

of a parallel connection is related to the individual resistances by

This relationship results in a total resistance

that is less than the smallest of the individual resistances. (This is

seen in the next example.) When resistors are connected in parallel, more current flows from the source than would
flow for any of them individually, and so the total resistance is lower.

21.20

EXAMPLE 21.2

Calculating Resistance, Current, Power Dissipation, and Power Output: Analysis of a Parallel
Circuit
Let the voltage output of the battery and resistances in the parallel connection in Figure 21.4 be the same as the
previously considered series connection:
the total resistance? (b) Find the total current. (c) Calculate the currents in each resistor, and show these add to
equal the total current output of the source. (d) Calculate the power dissipated by each resistor. (e) Find the power
output of the source, and show that it equals the total power dissipated by the resistors.

. (a) What is

, and

,

,

Strategy and Solution for (a)

The total resistance for a parallel combination of resistors is found using the equation below. Entering known values
gives

21.21

21.22

21.23

Thus,

(Note that in these calculations, each intermediate answer is shown with an extra digit.)

We must invert this to find the total resistance

. This yields

The total resistance with the correct number of significant digits is

Discussion for (a)

is, as predicted, less than the smallest individual resistance.

Strategy and Solution for (b)

The total current can be found from Ohm’s law, substituting

for the total resistance. This gives

Access for free at openstax.org

21.1 • Resistors in Series and Parallel

909

21.24

Discussion for (b)

Current
circuit with parallel connections has a smaller total resistance than the resistors connected in series.

for each device is much larger than for the same devices connected in series (see the previous example). A

Strategy and Solution for (c)

The individual currents are easily calculated from Ohm’s law, since each resistor gets the full voltage. Thus,

Similarly,

and

Discussion for (c)

The total current is the sum of the individual currents:

This is consistent with conservation of charge.

Strategy and Solution for (d)

21.25

21.26

21.27

21.28

The power dissipated by each resistor can be found using any of the equations relating power to current, voltage,

and resistance, since all three are known. Let us use

, since each resistor gets full voltage. Thus,

Similarly,

and

Discussion for (d)

21.29

21.30

21.31

The power dissipated by each resistor is considerably higher in parallel than when connected in series to the same
voltage source.

Strategy and Solution for (e)

The total power can also be calculated in several ways. Choosing

, and entering the total current, yields

21.32

Discussion for (e)

Total power dissipated by the resistors is also 179 W:

910

21 • Circuits and DC Instruments

This is consistent with the law of conservation of energy.

Overall Discussion

Note that both the currents and powers in parallel connections are greater than for the same devices in series.

21.33

Major Features of Resistors in Parallel

1. Parallel resistance is found from

, and it is smaller than any individual

resistance in the combination.

2. Each resistor in parallel has the same full voltage of the source applied to it. (Power distribution systems

most often use parallel connections to supply the myriad devices served with the same voltage and to allow
them to operate independently.)

3. Parallel resistors do not each get the total current; they divide it.

Combinations of Series and Parallel

More complex connections of resistors are sometimes just combinations of series and parallel. These are commonly
encountered, especially when wire resistance is considered. In that case, wire resistance is in series with other
resistances that are in parallel.

Combinations of series and parallel can be reduced to a single equivalent resistance using the technique illustrated
in Figure 21.5. Various parts are identified as either series or parallel, reduced to their equivalents, and further
reduced until a single resistance is left. The process is more time consuming than difficult.

FIGURE 21.5 This combination of seven resistors has both series and parallel parts. Each is identified and reduced to an equivalent
resistance, and these are further reduced until a single equivalent resistance is reached.

The simplest combination of series and parallel resistance, shown in Figure 21.6, is also the most instructive, since
it is found in many applications. For example,
could be the resistance of wires from a car battery to its electrical
devices, which are in parallel.
previously assumed that wire resistance is negligible, but, when it is not, it has important effects, as the next
example indicates.

could be the starter motor and a passenger compartment light. We have

and

Access for free at openstax.org

EXAMPLE 21.3

21.1 • Resistors in Series and Parallel

911

Drop, Current, and Power Dissipation: Combining Series and

Calculating Resistance,
Parallel Circuits
Figure 21.6 shows the resistors from the previous two examples wired in a different way—a combination of series
and parallel. We can consider
. (a) Find the total resistance.
(b) What is the

to be the resistance of wires leading to

. (d) What power is dissipated by

? (c) Find the current

through

drop in

and

?

FIGURE 21.6 These three resistors are connected to a voltage source so that
combination is in series with

.

and

are in parallel with one another and that

Strategy and Solution for (a)

To find the total resistance, we note that

and

are in parallel and their combination

is in series with

.

Thus the total (equivalent) resistance of this combination is

First, we find

using the equation for resistors in parallel and entering known values:

Inverting gives

So the total resistance is

Discussion for (a)

The total resistance of this combination is intermediate between the pure series and pure parallel values (
and

, respectively) found for the same resistors in the two previous examples.

Strategy and Solution for (b)

To find the

drop in

, we note that the full current

flows through

. Thus its

drop is

21.34

21.35

21.36

21.37

21.38

We must find before we can calculate

. The total current

is found using Ohm’s law for the circuit. That is,

Entering this into the expression above, we get

21.39

21.40

912

21 • Circuits and DC Instruments

Discussion for (b)

The voltage applied to
can significantly affect the operation of the devices represented by

is less than the total voltage by an amount

and

and

.

. When wire resistance is large, it

Strategy and Solution for (c)

To find the current through

, we must first find the voltage applied to it. We call this voltage

, because it is

applied to a parallel combination of resistors. The voltage applied to both
and so it is

and

is reduced by the amount

,

Now the current

through resistance

is found using Ohm’s law:

21.41

21.42

Discussion for (c)

The current is less than the 2.00 A that flowed through
previous parallel circuit example.

when it was connected in parallel to the battery in the

Strategy and Solution for (d)

The power dissipated by

is given by

Discussion for (d)

21.43

The power is less than the 24.0 W this resistor dissipated when connected in parallel to the 12.0-V source.

Practical Implications

One implication of this last example is that resistance in wires reduces the current and power delivered to a resistor.
If wire resistance is relatively large, as in a worn (or a very long) extension cord, then this loss can be significant. If a
large current is drawn, the

drop in the wires can also be significant.

For example, when you are rummaging in the refrigerator and the motor comes on, the refrigerator light dims
momentarily. Similarly, you can see the passenger compartment light dim when you start the engine of your car
(although this may be due to resistance inside the battery itself).

What is happening in these high-current situations is illustrated in Figure 21.7. The device represented by
very low resistance, and so when it is switched on, a large current flows. This increased current causes a larger
drop in the wires represented by
), which then dims
noticeably.

, reducing the voltage across the light bulb (which is

has a

Access for free at openstax.org

21.2 • Electromotive Force: Terminal Voltage

913

FIGURE 21.7 Why do lights dim when a large appliance is switched on? The answer is that the large current the appliance motor draws
causes a significant

drop in the wires and reduces the voltage across the light.

CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING

Can any arbitrary combination of resistors be broken down into series and parallel combinations? See if you can
draw a circuit diagram of resistors that cannot be broken down into combinations of series and parallel.
Solution
No, there are many ways to connect resistors that are not combinations of series and parallel, including loops and
junctions. In such cases Kirchhoff’s rules, to be introduced in Kirchhoff’s Rules, will allow you to analyze the circuit.

Problem-Solving Strategies for Series and Parallel Resistors

1. Draw a clear circuit diagram, labeling all resistors and voltage sources. This step includes a list of the

2.

knowns for the problem, since they are labeled in your circuit diagram.
Identify exactly what needs to be determined in the problem (identify the unknowns). A written list is
useful.

3. Determine whether resistors are in series, parallel, or a combination of both series and parallel. Examine

the circuit diagram to make this assessment. Resistors are in series if the same current must pass
sequentially through them.

4. Use the appropriate list of major features for series or parallel connections to solve for the unknowns. There

is one list for series and another for parallel. If your problem has a combination of series and parallel,
reduce it in steps by considering individual groups of series or parallel connections, as done in this module
and the examples. Special note: When finding

, the reciprocal must be taken with care.

5. Check to see whether the answers are reasonable and consistent. Units and numerical results must be

reasonable. Total series resistance should be greater, whereas total parallel resistance should be smaller,
for example. Power should be greater for the same devices in parallel compared with series, and so on.

21.2 Electromotive Force: Terminal Voltage

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

• Compare and contrast the voltage and the electromagnetic force of an electric power source.
• Describe what happens to the terminal voltage, current, and power delivered to a load as internal

resistance of the voltage source increases (due to aging of batteries, for example).
• Explain why it is beneficial to use more than one voltage source connected in parallel.

When you forget to turn off your car lights, they slowly dim as the battery runs down. Why don’t they simply blink off
when the battery’s energy is gone? Their gradual dimming implies that battery output voltage decreases as the
battery is depleted.

914

21 • Circuits and DC Instruments

Furthermore, if you connect an excessive number of 12-V lights in parallel to a car battery, they will be dim even
when the battery is fresh and even if the wires to the lights have very low resistance. This implies that the battery’s
output voltage is reduced by the overload.

The reason for the decrease in output voltage for depleted or overloaded batteries is that all voltage sources have
two fundamental parts—a source of electrical energy and an internal resistance. Let us examine both.

Electromotive Force

You can think of many different types of voltage sources. Batteries themselves come in many varieties. There are
many types of mechanical/electrical generators, driven by many different energy sources, ranging from nuclear to
wind. Solar cells create voltages directly from light, while thermoelectric devices create voltage from temperature
differences.

A few voltage sources are shown in Figure 21.8. All such devices create a potential difference and can supply
current if connected to a resistance. On the small scale, the potential difference creates an electric field that exerts
force on charges, causing current. We thus use the name electromotive force, abbreviated emf.

Emf is not a force at all; it is a special type of potential difference. To be precise, the electromotive force (emf) is the
potential difference of a source when no current is flowing. Units of emf are volts.

FIGURE 21.8 A variety of voltage sources (clockwise from top left): the Brazos Wind Farm in Fluvanna, Texas (credit: Leaflet, Wikimedia
Commons); the Krasnoyarsk Dam in Russia (credit: Alex Polezhaev); a solar farm (credit: U.S. Department of Energy); and a group of nickel
metal hydride batteries (credit: Tiaa Monto). The voltage output of each depends on its construction and load, and equals emf only if there
is no load.

Electromotive force is directly related to the source of potential difference, such as the particular combination of
chemicals in a battery. However, emf differs from the voltage output of the device when current flows. The voltage
across the terminals of a battery, for example, is less than the emf when the battery supplies current, and it declines
further as the battery is depleted or loaded down. However, if the device’s output voltage can be measured without
drawing current, then output voltage will equal emf (even for a very depleted battery).

Internal Resistance

As noted before, a 12-V truck battery is physically larger, contains more charge and energy, and can deliver a larger
current than a 12-V motorcycle battery. Both are lead-acid batteries with identical emf, but, because of its size, the
truck battery has a smaller internal resistance . Internal resistance is the inherent resistance to the flow of current
within the source itself.

Figure 21.9 is a schematic representation of the two fundamental parts of any voltage source. The emf (represented
by a script E in the figure) and internal resistance are in series. The smaller the internal resistance for a given emf,
the more current and the more power the source can supply.

Access for free at openstax.org

21.2 • Electromotive Force: Terminal Voltage

915

FIGURE 21.9 Any voltage source (in this case, a carbon-zinc dry cell) has an emf related to its source of potential difference, and an internal
resistance related to its construction. (Note that the script E stands for emf.). Also shown are the output terminals across which the
terminal voltage

, terminal voltage equals emf only if there is no current flowing.

is measured. Since

The internal resistance can behave in complex ways. As noted,
resistance may also depend on the magnitude and direction of the current through a voltage source, its
temperature, and even its history. The internal resistance of rechargeable nickel-cadmium cells, for example,
depends on how many times and how deeply they have been depleted.

increases as a battery is depleted. But internal

Things Great and Small: The Submicroscopic Origin of Battery Potential

Various types of batteries are available, with emfs determined by the combination of chemicals involved. We can
view this as a molecular reaction (what much of chemistry is about) that separates charge.

The lead-acid battery used in cars and other vehicles is one of the most common types. A single cell (one of six)
of this battery is seen in Figure 21.10. The cathode (positive) terminal of the cell is connected to a lead oxide
plate, while the anode (negative) terminal is connected to a lead plate. Both plates are immersed in sulfuric acid,
the electrolyte for the system.

FIGURE 21.10 Artist’s conception of a lead-acid cell. Chemical reactions in a lead-acid cell separate charge, sending negative charge
to the anode, which is connected to the lead plates. The lead oxide plates are connected to the positive or cathode terminal of the cell.
Sulfuric acid conducts the charge as well as participating in the chemical reaction.

The details of the chemical reaction are left to the reader to pursue in a chemistry text, but their results at the
molecular level help explain the potential created by the battery. Figure 21.11 shows the result of a single
chemical reaction. Two electrons are placed on the anode, making it negative, provided that the cathode
supplied two electrons. This leaves the cathode positively charged, because it has lost two electrons. In short, a
separation of charge has been driven by a chemical reaction.

Note that the reaction will not take place unless there is a complete circuit to allow two electrons to be supplied
to the cathode. Under many circumstances, these electrons come from the anode, flow through a resistance,
and return to the cathode. Note also that since the chemical reactions involve substances with resistance, it is
not possible to create the emf without an internal resistance.

916

21 • Circuits and DC Instruments

FIGURE 21.11 Artist’s conception of two electrons being forced onto the anode of a cell and two electrons being removed from the
cathode of the cell. The chemical reaction in a lead-acid battery places two electrons on the anode and removes two from the cathode.
It requires a closed circuit to proceed, since the two electrons must be supplied to the cathode.

Why are the chemicals able to produce a unique potential difference? Quantum mechanical descriptions of
molecules, which take into account the types of atoms and numbers of electrons in them, are able to predict the
energy states they can have and the energies of reactions between them.

In the case of a lead-acid battery, an energy of 2 eV is given to each electron sent to the anode. Voltage is defined as

the electrical potential energy divided by charge:

. An electron volt is the energy given to a single electron

by a voltage of 1 V. So the voltage here is 2 V, since 2 eV is given to each electron. It is the energy produced in each
molecular reaction that produces the voltage. A different reaction produces a different energy and, hence, a
different voltage.

Terminal Voltage

The voltage output of a device is measured across its terminals and, thus, is called its terminal voltage
voltage is given by

. Terminal

21.44

where is the internal resistance and is the current flowing at the time of the measurement.

is positive if current flows away from the positive terminal, as shown in Figure 21.9. You can see that the larger the

current, the smaller the terminal voltage. And it is likewise true that the larger the internal resistance, the smaller
the terminal voltage.

Suppose a load resistance
series, the total resistance in the circuit is

is connected to a voltage source, as in Figure 21.12. Since the resistances are in

. Thus the current is given by Ohm’s law to be

21.45

FIGURE 21.12 Schematic of a voltage source and its load
affect the terminal voltage and current delivered to the load. (Note that the script E stands for emf.)

. Since the internal resistance is in series with the load, it can significantly

We see from this expression that the smaller the internal resistance , the greater the current the voltage source
supplies to its load
resistance, then the current is significantly reduced, as the following example illustrates.

increases. If becomes a significant fraction of the load

. As batteries are depleted,

Access for free at openstax.org

EXAMPLE 21.4

21.2 • Electromotive Force: Terminal Voltage

917

Calculating Terminal Voltage, Power Dissipation, Current, and Resistance: Terminal Voltage
and Load
A certain battery has a 12.0-V emf and an internal resistance of
connected to a
does the
and power dissipated by a

. (a) Calculate its terminal voltage when
load? (c) What power

load. (b) What is the terminal voltage when connected to a

load dissipate? (d) If the internal resistance grows to

, find the current, terminal voltage,

load.

Strategy

The analysis above gave an expression for current when internal resistance is taken into account. Once the current is
found, the terminal voltage can be calculated using the equation
dissipated by a resistor can also be found.

. Once current is found, the power

Solution for (a)

Entering the given values for the emf, load resistance, and internal resistance into the expression above yields

Enter the known values into the equation

to get the terminal voltage:

21.46

21.47

Discussion for (a)

The terminal voltage here is only slightly lower than the emf, implying that
battery.

is a light load for this particular

Solution for (b)

Similarly, with

, the current is

The terminal voltage is now

Discussion for (b)

21.48

21.49

This terminal voltage exhibits a more significant reduction compared with emf, implying
this battery.

is a heavy load for

Solution for (c)

The power dissipated by the
gives

Discussion for (c)

load can be found using the formula

. Entering the known values

21.50

Note that this power can also be obtained using the expressions

or

, where

is the terminal voltage (10.0 V

in this case).

918

21 • Circuits and DC Instruments

Solution for (d)

Here the internal resistance has increased, perhaps due to the depletion of the battery, to the point where it is as
great as the load resistance. As before, we first find the current by entering the known values into the expression,
yielding

Now the terminal voltage is

and the power dissipated by the load is

Discussion for (d)

21.51

21.52

21.53

We see that the increased internal resistance has significantly decreased terminal voltage, current, and power
delivered to a load.

Battery testers, such as those in Figure 21.13, use small load resistors to intentionally draw current to determine
whether the terminal voltage drops below an acceptable level. They really test the internal resistance of the battery.
If internal resistance is high, the battery is weak, as evidenced by its low terminal voltage.

FIGURE 21.13 These two battery testers measure terminal voltage under a load to determine the condition of a battery. The large device is
being used by a U.S. Navy electronics technician to test large batteries aboard the aircraft carrier USS Nimitzand has a small resistance that
can dissipate large amounts of power. (credit: U.S. Navy photo by Photographer’s Mate Airman Jason A. Johnston) The small device is used
on small batteries and has a digital display to indicate the acceptability of their terminal voltage. (credit: Keith Williamson)

Some batteries can be recharged by passing a current through them in the direction opposite to the current they
supply to a resistance. This is done routinely in cars and batteries for small electrical appliances and electronic
devices, and is represented pictorially in Figure 21.14. The voltage output of the battery charger must be greater
than the emf of the battery to reverse current through it. This will cause the terminal voltage of the battery to be
greater than the emf, since

, and is now negative.

FIGURE 21.14 A car battery charger reverses the normal direction of current through a battery, reversing its chemical reaction and
replenishing its chemical potential.

Multiple Voltage Sources

There are two voltage sources when a battery charger is used. Voltage sources connected in series are relatively
simple. When voltage sources are in series, their internal resistances add and their emfs add algebraically. (See

Access for free at openstax.org

21.2 • Electromotive Force: Terminal Voltage

919

Figure 21.15.) Series connections of voltage sources are common—for example, in flashlights, toys, and other
appliances. Usually, the cells are in series in order to produce a larger total emf.

But if the cells oppose one another, such as when one is put into an appliance backward, the total emf is less, since
it is the algebraic sum of the individual emfs.

A battery is a multiple connection of voltaic cells, as shown in Figure 21.16. The disadvantage of series connections
of cells is that their internal resistances add. One of the authors once owned a 1957 MGA that had two 6-V batteries
in series, rather than a single 12-V battery. This arrangement produced a large internal resistance that caused him
many problems in starting the engine.

FIGURE 21.15 A series connection of two voltage sources. The emfs (each labeled with a script E) and internal resistances add, giving a
.
total emf of

and a total internal resistance of

FIGURE 21.16 Batteries are multiple connections of individual cells, as shown in this modern rendition of an old print. Single cells, such as
AA or C cells, are commonly called batteries, although this is technically incorrect.

If the seriesconnection of two voltage sources is made into a complete circuit with the emfs in opposition, then a

current of magnitude

flows. See Figure 21.17, for example, which shows a circuit exactly

analogous to the battery charger discussed above. If two voltage sources in series with emfs in the same sense are

connected to a load

, as in Figure 21.18, then

flows.

FIGURE 21.17 These two voltage sources are connected in series with their emfs in opposition. Current flows in the direction of the greater

emf and is limited to

by the sum of the internal resistances. (Note that each emf is represented by script E in the figure.)

A battery charger connected to a battery is an example of such a connection. The charger must have a larger emf than the battery to reverse
current through it.

920

21 • Circuits and DC Instruments

FIGURE 21.18 This schematic represents a flashlight with two cells (voltage sources) and a single bulb (load resistance) in series. The

current that flows is

. (Note that each emf is represented by script E in the figure.)

Take-Home Experiment: Flashlight Batteries

Find a flashlight that uses several batteries and find new and old batteries. Based on the discussions in this
module, predict the brightness of the flashlight when different combinations of batteries are used. Do your
predictions match what you observe? Now place new batteries in the flashlight and leave the flashlight switched
on for several hours. Is the flashlight still quite bright? Do the same with the old batteries. Is the flashlight as
bright when left on for the same length of time with old and new batteries? What does this say for the case when
you are limited in the number of available new batteries?

Figure 21.19 shows two voltage sources with identical emfs in parallel and connected to a load resistance. In this
simple case, the total emf is the same as the individual emfs. But the total internal resistance is reduced, since the
internal resistances are in parallel. The parallel connection thus can produce a larger current.

Here,

flows through the load, and

is less than those of the individual batteries. For example,

some diesel-powered cars use two 12-V batteries in parallel; they produce a total emf of 12 V but can deliver the
larger current needed to start a diesel engine.

FIGURE 21.19 Two voltage sources with identical emfs (each labeled by script E) connected in parallel produce the same emf but have a
smaller total internal resistance than the individual sources. Parallel combinations are often used to deliver more current. Here

flows through the load.

Animals as Electrical Detectors

A number of animals both produce and detect electrical signals. Fish, sharks, platypuses, and echidnas (spiny
anteaters) all detect electric fields generated by nerve activity in prey. Electric eels produce their own emf through
biological cells (electric organs) called electroplaques, which are arranged in both series and parallel as a set of
batteries.

Electroplaques are flat, disk-like cells; those of the electric eel have a voltage of 0.15 V across each one. These cells

Access for free at openstax.org

21.2 • Electromotive Force: Terminal Voltage

921

are usually located toward the head or tail of the animal, although in the case of the electric eel, they are found
along the entire body. The electroplaques in the South American eel are arranged in 140 rows, with each row
stretching horizontally along the body and containing 5,000 electroplaques. This can yield an emf of approximately
600 V, and a current of 1 A—deadly.

The mechanism for detection of external electric fields is similar to that for producing nerve signals in the cell
through depolarization and repolarization—the movement of ions across the cell membrane. Within the fish, weak
electric fields in the water produce a current in a gel-filled canal that runs from the skin to sensing cells, producing a
, while
nerve signal. The Australian platypus, one of the very few mammals that lay eggs, can detect fields of 30

sharks have been found to be able to sense a field in their snouts as small as 100

(Figure 21.20). Electric eels

use their own electric fields produced by the electroplaques to stun their prey or enemies.

FIGURE 21.20 Sand tiger sharks (Carcharias taurus), like this one at the Minnesota Zoo, use electroreceptors in their snouts to locate prey.
(credit: Jim Winstead, Flickr)

Solar Cell Arrays

Another example dealing with multiple voltage sources is that of combinations of solar cells—wired in both series
and parallel combinations to yield a desired voltage and current. Photovoltaic generation (PV), the conversion of
sunlight directly into electricity, is based upon the photoelectric effect, in which photons hitting the surface of a
solar cell create an electric current in the cell.

Most solar cells are made from pure silicon—either as single-crystal silicon, or as a thin film of silicon deposited
upon a glass or metal backing. Most single cells have a voltage output of about 0.5 V, while the current output is a
function of the amount of sunlight upon the cell (the incident solar radiation—the insolation). Under bright noon
sunlight, a current of about

of cell surface area is produced by typical single-crystal cells.

Individual solar cells are connected electrically in modules to meet electrical-energy needs. They can be wired
together in series or in parallel—connected like the batteries discussed earlier. A solar-cell array or module usually
consists of between 36 and 72 cells, with a power output of 50 W to 140 W.

The output of the solar cells is direct current. For most uses in a home, AC is required, so a device called an inverter
must be used to convert the DC to AC. Any extra output can then be passed on to the outside electrical grid for sale
to the utility.

Take-Home Experiment: Virtual Solar Cells

One can assemble a “virtual” solar cell array by using playing cards, or business or index cards, to represent a
solar cell. Combinations of these cards in series and/or parallel can model the required array output. Assume
each card has an output of 0.5 V and a current (under bright light) of 2 A. Using your cards, how would you

922

21 • Circuits and DC Instruments

arrange them to produce an output of 6 A at 3 V (18 W)?

Suppose you were told that you needed only 18 W (but no required voltage). Would you need more cards to
make this arrangement?

21.3 Kirchhoff’s Rules

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

• Analyze a complex circuit using Kirchhoff’s rules, using the conventions for determining the correct signs

of various terms.

Many complex circuits, such as the one in Figure 21.21, cannot be analyzed with the series-parallel techniques
developed in Resistors in Series and Parallel and Electromotive Force: Terminal Voltage. There are, however, two
circuit analysis rules that can be used to analyze any circuit, simple or complex. These rules are special cases of the
laws of conservation of charge and conservation of energy. The rules are known as Kirchhoff’s rules, after their
inventor Gustav Kirchhoff (1824–1887).

FIGURE 21.21 This circuit cannot be reduced to a combination of series and parallel connections. Kirchhoff’s rules, special applications of
the laws of conservation of charge and energy, can be used to analyze it. (Note: The script E in the figure represents electromotive force,
emf.)

Kirchhoff’s Rules

• Kirchhoff’s first rule—the junction rule. The sum of all currents entering a junction must equal the sum of all

currents leaving the junction.

• Kirchhoff’s second rule—the loop rule. The algebraic sum of changes in potential around any closed circuit

path (loop) must be zero.

Explanations of the two rules will now be given, followed by problem-solving hints for applying Kirchhoff’s rules, and
a worked example that uses them.

Kirchhoff’s First Rule

Kirchhoff’s first rule (the junction rule) is an application of the conservation of charge to a junction; it is illustrated in
Figure 21.22. Current is the flow of charge, and charge is conserved; thus, whatever charge flows into the junction
must flow out. Kirchhoff’s first rule requires that
to analyze circuits and to solve circuit problems.

(see figure). Equations like this can and will be used

Access for free at openstax.org

21.3 • Kirchhoff’s Rules

923

Making Connections: Conservation Laws

Kirchhoff’s rules for circuit analysis are applications of conservation laws to circuits. The first rule is the
application of conservation of charge, while the second rule is the application of conservation of energy.
Conservation laws, even used in a specific application, such as circuit analysis, are so basic as to form the
foundation of that application.

FIGURE 21.22 The junction rule. The diagram shows an example of Kirchhoff’s first rule where the sum of the currents into a junction
equals the sum of the currents out of a junction. In this case, the current going into the junction splits and comes out as two currents, so
is 4 A.
that

. Here must be 11 A, since

is 7 A and

Kirchhoff’s Second Rule

, rather than potential energy, but the two are related since

Kirchhoff’s second rule (the loop rule) is an application of conservation of energy. The loop rule is stated in terms of
potential,
. Recall that emf is the potential
difference of a source when no current is flowing. In a closed loop, whatever energy is supplied by emf must be
transferred into other forms by devices in the loop, since there are no other ways in which energy can be transferred
into or out of the circuit. Figure 21.23 illustrates the changes in potential in a simple series circuit loop.

Kirchhoff’s second rule requires
means the emf equals the sum of the

(voltage) drops in the loop.

. Rearranged, this is

, which

FIGURE 21.23 The loop rule. An example of Kirchhoff’s second rule where the sum of the changes in potential around a closed loop must
be zero. (a) In this standard schematic of a simple series circuit, the emf supplies 18 V, which is reduced to zero by the resistances, with 1 V

924

21 • Circuits and DC Instruments

across the internal resistance, and 12 V and 5 V across the two load resistances, for a total of 18 V. (b) This perspective view represents the
potential as something like a roller coaster, where charge is raised in potential by the emf and lowered by the resistances. (Note that the
script E stands for emf.)

Applying Kirchhoff’s Rules

By applying Kirchhoff’s rules, we generate equations that allow us to find the unknowns in circuits. The unknowns
may be currents, emfs, or resistances. Each time a rule is applied, an equation is produced. If there are as many
independent equations as unknowns, then the problem can be solved. There are two decisions you must make
when applying Kirchhoff’s rules. These decisions determine the signs of various quantities in the equations you
obtain from applying the rules.

1. When applying Kirchhoff’s first rule, the junction rule, you must label the current in each branch and decide in

what direction it is going. For example, in Figure 21.21, Figure 21.22, and Figure 21.23, currents are labeled

,

,

, and , and arrows indicate their directions. There is no risk here, for if you choose the wrong direction,

the current will be of the correct magnitude but negative.

2. When applying Kirchhoff’s second rule, the loop rule, you must identify a closed loop and decide in which

direction to go around it, clockwise or counterclockwise. For example, in Figure 21.23 the loop was traversed in
the same direction as the current (clockwise). Again, there is no risk; going around the circuit in the opposite
direction reverses the sign of every term in the equation, which is like multiplying both sides of the equation by

Figure 21.24 and the following points will help you get the plus or minus signs right when applying the loop rule.
Note that the resistors and emfs are traversed by going from a to b. In many circuits, it will be necessary to construct
more than one loop. In traversing each loop, one needs to be consistent for the sign of the change in potential. (See
Example 21.5.)

FIGURE 21.24 Each of these resistors and voltage sources is traversed from a to b. The potential changes are shown beneath each element
and are explained in the text. (Note that the script E stands for emf.)

• When a resistor is traversed in the same direction as the current, the change in potential is

. (See Figure

21.24.)

• When a resistor is traversed in the direction opposite to the current, the change in potential is

. (See Figure

21.24.)

• When an emf is traversed from to + (the same direction it moves positive charge), the change in potential is

+emf. (See Figure 21.24.)

• When an emf is traversed from + to (opposite to the direction it moves positive charge), the change in

potential is emf. (See Figure 21.24.)

EXAMPLE 21.5

Calculating Current: Using Kirchhoff’s Rules
Find the currents flowing in the circuit in Figure 21.25.

Access for free at openstax.org

21.3 • Kirchhoff’s Rules

925

FIGURE 21.25 This circuit is similar to that in Figure 21.21, but the resistances and emfs are specified. (Each emf is denoted by script E.)
The currents in each branch are labeled and assumed to move in the directions shown. This example uses Kirchhoff’s rules to find the
currents.

Strategy

This circuit is sufficiently complex that the currents cannot be found using Ohm’s law and the series-parallel
techniques—it is necessary to use Kirchhoff’s rules. Currents have been labeled
in the figure and
assumptions have been made about their directions. Locations on the diagram have been labeled with letters a
through h. In the solution we will apply the junction and loop rules, seeking three independent equations to allow us
to solve for the three unknown currents.

, and

,

Solution

We begin by applying Kirchhoff’s first or junction rule at point a. This gives

21.54

flows into the junction, while

since
flow out. Applying the junction rule at e produces exactly the same
equation, so that no new information is obtained. This is a single equation with three unknowns—three independent
equations are needed, and so the loop rule must be applied.

and

Now we consider the loop abcdea. Going from a to b, we traverse

in the same (assumed) direction of the current

, and so the change in potential is

. Then going from b to c, we go from to +, so that the change in

potential is
d to a again traverses a resistor in the same direction as its current, giving a change in potential of

. Traversing the internal resistance

from c to d gives

. Completing the loop by going from

.

The loop rule states that the changes in potential sum to zero. Thus,

Substituting values from the circuit diagram for the resistances and emf, and canceling the ampere unit gives

Now applying the loop rule to aefgha (we could have chosen abcdefgha as well) similarly gives

21.55

21.56

21.57

Note that the signs are reversed compared with the other loop, because elements are traversed in the opposite
direction. With values entered, this becomes

These three equations are sufficient to solve for the three unknown currents. First, solve the second equation for

:

21.58

926

21 • Circuits and DC Instruments

Now solve the third equation for

:

Substituting these two new equations into the first one allows us to find a value for

:

Combining terms gives

Substituting this value for

back into the fourth equation gives

The minus sign means

flows in the direction opposite to that assumed in Figure 21.25.

Finally, substituting the value for

into the fifth equation gives

21.59

21.60

21.61

21.62

21.63

21.64

21.65

21.66

21.67

Discussion

Just as a check, we note that indeed
values into the equation for the abcdefgha loop.

. The results could also have been checked by entering all of the

Problem-Solving Strategies for Kirchhoff’s Rules

1. Make certain there is a clear circuit diagram on which you can label all known and unknown resistances,

emfs, and currents. If a current is unknown, you must assign it a direction. This is necessary for determining
the signs of potential changes. If you assign the direction incorrectly, the current will be found to have a
negative value—no harm done.

2. Apply the junction rule to any junction in the circuit. Each time the junction rule is applied, you should get an

equation with a current that does not appear in a previous application—if not, then the equation is
redundant.

3. Apply the loop rule to as many loops as needed to solve for the unknowns in the problem. (There must be as

many independent equations as unknowns.) To apply the loop rule, you must choose a direction to go
around the loop. Then carefully and consistently determine the signs of the potential changes for each
element using the four bulleted points discussed above in conjunction with Figure 21.24.

4. Solve the simultaneous equations for the unknowns. This may involve many algebraic steps, requiring

careful checking and rechecking.

5. Check to see whether the answers are reasonable and consistent. The numbers should be of the correct
order of magnitude, neither exceedingly large nor vanishingly small. The signs should be reasonable—for
example, no resistance should be negative. Check to see that the values obtained satisfy the various
equations obtained from applying the rules. The currents should satisfy the junction rule, for example.

The material in this section is correct in theory. We should be able to verify it by making measurements of current
and voltage. In fact, some of the devices used to make such measurements are straightforward applications of the
principles covered so far and are explored in the next modules. As we shall see, a very basic, even profound, fact
results—making a measurement alters the quantity being measured.

Access for free at openstax.org

21.4 • DC Voltmeters and Ammeters

927

CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING

Can Kirchhoff’s rules be applied to simple series and parallel circuits or are they restricted for use in more
complicated circuits that are not combinations of series and parallel?
Solution
Kirchhoff's rules can be applied to any circuit since they are applications to circuits of two conservation laws.
Conservation laws are the most broadly applicable principles in physics. It is usually mathematically simpler to use
the rules for series and parallel in simpler circuits so we emphasize Kirchhoff’s rules for use in more complicated
situations. But the rules for series and parallel can be derived from Kirchhoff’s rules. Moreover, Kirchhoff’s rules can
be expanded to devices other than resistors and emfs, such as capacitors, and are one of the basic analysis devices
in circuit analysis.

21.4 DC Voltmeters and Ammeters

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

• Explain why a voltmeter must be connected in parallel with the circuit.
• Draw a diagram showing an ammeter correctly connected in a circuit.
• Describe how a galvanometer can be used as either a voltmeter or an ammeter.
• Find the resistance that must be placed in series with a galvanometer to allow it to be used as a voltmeter

with a given reading.

• Explain why measuring the voltage or current in a circuit can never be exact.

Voltmeters measure voltage, whereas ammeters measure current. Some of the meters in automobile dashboards,
digital cameras, cell phones, and tuner-amplifiers are voltmeters or ammeters. (See Figure 21.26.) The internal
construction of the simplest of these meters and how they are connected to the system they monitor give further
insight into applications of series and parallel connections.

FIGURE 21.26 The fuel and temperature gauges (far right and far left, respectively) in this 1996 Volkswagen are voltmeters that register
the voltage output of “sender” units, which are hopefully proportional to the amount of gasoline in the tank and the engine temperature.
(credit: Christian Giersing)

Voltmeters are connected in parallel with whatever device’s voltage is to be measured. A parallel connection is used
because objects in parallel experience the same potential difference. (See Figure 21.27, where the voltmeter is
represented by the symbol V.)

Ammeters are connected in series with whatever device’s current is to be measured. A series connection is used
because objects in series have the same current passing through them. (See Figure 21.28, where the ammeter is
represented by the symbol A.)

928

21 • Circuits and DC Instruments

FIGURE 21.27 (a) To measure potential differences in this series circuit, the voltmeter (V) is placed in parallel with the voltage source or
either of the resistors. Note that terminal voltage is measured between points a and b. It is not possible to connect the voltmeter directly
across the emf without including its internal resistance,

. (b) A digital voltmeter in use. (credit: Messtechniker, Wikimedia Commons)

FIGURE 21.28 An ammeter (A) is placed in series to measure current. All of the current in this circuit flows through the meter. The ammeter
would have the same reading if located between points d and e or between points f and a as it does in the position shown. (Note that the
script capital E stands for emf, and stands for the internal resistance of the source of potential difference.)

Analog Meters: Galvanometers

Analog meters have a needle that swivels to point at numbers on a scale, as opposed to digital meters, which have
numerical readouts similar to a hand-held calculator. The heart of most analog meters is a device called a
galvanometer, denoted by G. Current flow through a galvanometer,
(This deflection is due to the force of a magnetic field upon a current-carrying wire.)

, produces a proportional needle deflection.

The two crucial characteristics of a given galvanometer are its resistance and current sensitivity. Current sensitivity
is the current that gives a full-scale deflection of the galvanometer’s needle, the maximum current that the
instrument can measure. For example, a galvanometer with a current sensitivity of
of its needle when

flows through it, reads half-scale when

flows through it, and so on.

has a maximum deflection

Access for free at openstax.org

If such a galvanometer has a
a full-scale reading. By connecting resistors to this galvanometer in different ways, you can use it as either a
voltmeter or ammeter that can measure a broad range of voltages or currents.

resistance, then a voltage of only

produces

21.4 • DC Voltmeters and Ammeters

929

Galvanometer as Voltmeter
Figure 21.29 shows how a galvanometer can be used as a voltmeter by connecting it in series with a large
resistance,
want 10 V to produce a full-scale deflection of a voltmeter containing a
Then 10 V applied to the meter must produce a current of

. The total resistance must be

. The value of the resistance

galvanometer with a

is determined by the maximum voltage to be measured. Suppose you

sensitivity.

21.68

21.69

is so large that the galvanometer resistance,
(
produces a half-scale deflection by producing a
proportional to voltage as desired.

, is nearly negligible.) Note that 5 V applied to this voltmeter

current through the meter, and so the voltmeter’s reading is

This voltmeter would not be useful for voltages less than about half a volt, because the meter deflection would be
small and difficult to read accurately. For other voltage ranges, other resistances are placed in series with the
galvanometer. Many meters have a choice of scales. That choice involves switching an appropriate resistance into
series with the galvanometer.

FIGURE 21.29 A large resistance
on the choice of
galvanometer.)

. The larger the voltage to be measured, the larger must be. (Note that

represents the internal resistance of the

placed in series with a galvanometer G produces a voltmeter, the full-scale deflection of which depends

Galvanometer as Ammeter
The same galvanometer can also be made into an ammeter by placing it in parallel with a small resistance , often
called the shunt resistance, as shown in Figure 21.30. Since the shunt resistance is small, most of the current
passes through it, allowing an ammeter to measure currents much greater than those producing a full-scale
deflection of the galvanometer.

Suppose, for example, an ammeter is needed that gives a full-scale deflection for 1.0 A, and contains the same

galvanometer with its

sensitivity. Since

and are in parallel, the voltage across them is the same.

These

drops are

so that

. Solving for

, and noting that

is

and is

0.999950 A, we have

×

21.70

FIGURE 21.30 A small shunt resistance
depends on the choice of
meter is shunted through
may also have multiple scales for greater flexibility in application. The various scales are achieved by switching various shunt resistances in
parallel with the galvanometer—the greater the maximum current to be measured, the smaller the shunt resistance must be.

. The larger the current to be measured, the smaller must be. Most of the current ( ) flowing through the
to protect the galvanometer. (Note that

placed in parallel with a galvanometer G produces an ammeter, the full-scale deflection of which

represents the internal resistance of the galvanometer.) Ammeters

Taking Measurements Alters the Circuit

When you use a voltmeter or ammeter, you are connecting another resistor to an existing circuit and, thus, altering

930

21 • Circuits and DC Instruments

the circuit. Ideally, voltmeters and ammeters do not appreciably affect the circuit, but it is instructive to examine the
circumstances under which they do or do not interfere.

First, consider the voltmeter, which is always placed in parallel with the device being measured. Very little current
flows through the voltmeter if its resistance is a few orders of magnitude greater than the device, and so the circuit
is not appreciably affected. (See Figure 21.31(a).) (A large resistance in parallel with a small one has a combined
resistance essentially equal to the small one.) If, however, the voltmeter’s resistance is comparable to that of the
device being measured, then the two in parallel have a smaller resistance, appreciably affecting the circuit. (See
Figure 21.31(b).) The voltage across the device is not the same as when the voltmeter is out of the circuit.

FIGURE 21.31 (a) A voltmeter having a resistance much larger than the device (
parallel resistance essentially the same as the device and does not appreciably affect the circuit being measured. (b) Here the voltmeter
has the same resistance as the device (
connected. This is an example of a significant alteration of the circuit and is to be avoided.

), so that the parallel resistance is half of what it is when the voltmeter is not

) with which it is in parallel produces a

An ammeter is placed in series in the branch of the circuit being measured, so that its resistance adds to that
branch. Normally, the ammeter’s resistance is very small compared with the resistances of the devices in the circuit,
and so the extra resistance is negligible. (See Figure 21.32(a).) However, if very small load resistances are involved,
or if the ammeter is not as low in resistance as it should be, then the total series resistance is significantly greater,
and the current in the branch being measured is reduced. (See Figure 21.32(b).)

A practical problem can occur if the ammeter is connected incorrectly. If it was put in parallel with the resistor to
measure the current in it, you could possibly damage the meter; the low resistance of the ammeter would allow
most of the current in the circuit to go through the galvanometer, and this current would be larger since the effective
resistance is smaller.

FIGURE 21.32 (a) An ammeter normally has such a small resistance that the total series resistance in the branch being measured is not
appreciably increased. The circuit is essentially unaltered compared with when the ammeter is absent. (b) Here the ammeter’s resistance is
the same as that of the branch, so that the total resistance is doubled and the current is half what it is without the ammeter. This significant
alteration of the circuit is to be avoided.

One solution to the problem of voltmeters and ammeters interfering with the circuits being measured is to use
galvanometers with greater sensitivity. This allows construction of voltmeters with greater resistance and ammeters
with smaller resistance than when less sensitive galvanometers are used.

There are practical limits to galvanometer sensitivity, but it is possible to get analog meters that make
measurements accurate to a few percent. Note that the inaccuracy comes from altering the circuit, not from a fault
in the meter.

Connections: Limits to Knowledge

Making a measurement alters the system being measured in a manner that produces uncertainty in the

Access for free at openstax.org

21.5 • Null Measurements

931

measurement. For macroscopic systems, such as the circuits discussed in this module, the alteration can
usually be made negligibly small, but it cannot be eliminated entirely. For submicroscopic systems, such as
atoms, nuclei, and smaller particles, measurement alters the system in a manner that cannot be made arbitrarily
small. This actually limits knowledge of the system—even limiting what nature can know about itself. We shall
see profound implications of this when the Heisenberg uncertainty principle is discussed in the modules on
quantum mechanics.

There is another measurement technique based on drawing no current at all and, hence, not altering the circuit
at all. These are called null measurements and are the topic of Null Measurements. Digital meters that employ
solid-state electronics and null measurements can attain accuracies of one part in

.

CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING

Digital meters are able to detect smaller currents than analog meters employing galvanometers. How does this
explain their ability to measure voltage and current more accurately than analog meters?
Solution
Since digital meters require less current than analog meters, they alter the circuit less than analog meters. Their
resistance as a voltmeter can be far greater than an analog meter, and their resistance as an ammeter can be far
less than an analog meter. Consult Figure 21.27 and Figure 21.28 and their discussion in the text.

PHET EXPLORATIONS

Circuit Construction Kit (DC Only), Virtual Lab
Stimulate a neuron and monitor what happens. Pause, rewind, and move forward in time in order to observe the ions
as they move across the neuron membrane.

Click to view content (https://openstax.org/books/college-physics-2e/pages/21-4-dc-voltmeters-and-ammeters)

21.5 Null Measurements

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

• Explain why a null measurement device is more accurate than a standard voltmeter or ammeter.
• Demonstrate how a Wheatstone bridge can be used to accurately calculate the resistance in a circuit.

Standard measurements of voltage and current alter the circuit being measured, introducing uncertainties in the
measurements. Voltmeters draw some extra current, whereas ammeters reduce current flow. Null measurements
balance voltages so that there is no current flowing through the measuring device and, therefore, no alteration of the
circuit being measured.

Null measurements are generally more accurate but are also more complex than the use of standard voltmeters and
ammeters, and they still have limits to their precision. In this module, we shall consider a few specific types of null
measurements, because they are common and interesting, and they further illuminate principles of electric circuits.

The Potentiometer

Suppose you wish to measure the emf of a battery. Consider what happens if you connect the battery directly to a
standard voltmeter as shown in Figure 21.33. (Once we note the problems with this measurement, we will examine
a null measurement that improves accuracy.) As discussed before, the actual quantity measured is the terminal
voltage
internal resistance of the battery.

, where is the current that flows and is the

, which is related to the emf of the battery by

The emf could be accurately calculated if were very accurately known, but it is usually not. If the current
be made zero, then
to operate; thus, another technique is needed.

, and so emf could be directly measured. However, standard voltmeters need a current

could

932

21 • Circuits and DC Instruments

FIGURE 21.33 An analog voltmeter attached to a battery draws a small but nonzero current and measures a terminal voltage that differs
from the emf of the battery. (Note that the script capital E symbolizes electromotive force, or emf.) Since the internal resistance of the
battery is not known precisely, it is not possible to calculate the emf precisely.

A potentiometer is a null measurement device for measuring potentials (voltages). (See Figure 21.34.) A voltage
source is connected to a resistor
in potential (an
locations along the wire.

drop) along the wire, so that a variable potential can be obtained by making contact at varying

say, a long wire, and passes a constant current through it. There is a steady drop

Figure 21.34(b) shows an unknown
galvanometer. Note that
the drawing) is adjusted until the galvanometer reads zero. When the galvanometer reads zero,

opposes the other voltage source. The location of the contact point (see the arrow on
, where
is the resistance of the section of wire up to the contact point. Since no current flows through the galvanometer,
is directly sensed.

none flows through the unknown emf, and so

in the figure) connected in series with a

(represented by script

Now, a very precisely known standard
galvanometer again reads zero, so that

is substituted for

, and the contact point is adjusted until the

. In both cases, no current passes through the galvanometer,

and so the current

through the long wire is the same. Upon taking the ratio

,

cancels, giving

Solving for

gives

21.71

21.72

FIGURE 21.34 The potentiometer, a null measurement device. (a) A voltage source connected to a long wire resistor passes a constant
current
adjusted until the galvanometer reads zero. The segment of wire has a resistance
connection since no current flows through the galvanometer. The unknown emf is thus proportional to the resistance of the wire segment.

in the figure) is connected as shown, and the point of contact along

through it. (b) An unknown emf (labeled script

, where is unaffected by the

and script

is

Because a long uniform wire is used for

, the ratio of resistances

is the same as the ratio of the lengths of

Access for free at openstax.org

21.5 • Null Measurements

933

wire that zero the galvanometer for each emf. The three quantities on the right-hand side of the equation are now
can be calculated. The uncertainty in this calculation can be considerably smaller
known or measured, and
than when using a voltmeter directly, but it is not zero. There is always some uncertainty in the ratio of resistances
. Furthermore, it is not possible to tell when the galvanometer reads exactly zero,

and in the standard
which introduces error into both

and

, and may also affect the current

.

Resistance Measurements and the Wheatstone Bridge

There is a variety of so-called ohmmeters that purport to measure resistance. What the most common ohmmeters
actually do is to apply a voltage to a resistance, measure the current, and calculate the resistance using Ohm’s law.
Their readout is this calculated resistance. Two configurations for ohmmeters using standard voltmeters and
ammeters are shown in Figure 21.35. Such configurations are limited in accuracy, because the meters alter both the
voltage applied to the resistor and the current that flows through it.

FIGURE 21.35 Two methods for measuring resistance with standard meters. (a) Assuming a known voltage for the source, an ammeter
varies with current, it is better to measure it.
measures current, and resistance is calculated as

. (b) Since the terminal voltage

is most accurately known when is small, but

itself is most accurately known when it is large.

The Wheatstone bridge is a null measurement device for calculating resistance by balancing potential drops in a
circuit. (See Figure 21.36.) The device is called a bridge because the galvanometer forms a bridge between two
branches. A variety of bridge devices are used to make null measurements in circuits.

and

are precisely known, while the arrow through

can be precisely read. With the unknown resistance

Resistors
value of
galvanometer reads zero. The potential difference between points b and d is then zero, meaning that b and d are at
the same potential. With no current running through the galvanometer, it has no effect on the rest of the circuit. So
drops
the branches abc and adc are in parallel, and each branch has the full voltage of the source. That is, the
along abc and adc are the same. Since b and d are at the same potential, the
drop along ab. Thus,

indicates that it is a variable resistance. The

drop along ad must equal the

is adjusted until the

in the circuit,

Again, since b and d are at the same potential, the

drop along dc must equal the

drop along bc. Thus,

Taking the ratio of these last two expressions gives

Canceling the currents and solving for Rx yields

21.73

21.74

21.75

21.76

934

21 • Circuits and DC Instruments

FIGURE 21.36 The Wheatstone bridge is used to calculate unknown resistances. The variable resistance
galvanometer reads zero with the switch closed. This simplifies the circuit, allowing
discussed in the text.

to be calculated based on the

drops as

is adjusted until the

This equation is used to calculate the unknown resistance when current through the galvanometer is zero. This
method can be very accurate (often to four significant digits), but it is limited by two factors. First, it is not possible
to get the current through the galvanometer to be exactly zero. Second, there are always uncertainties in
and

, which contribute to the uncertainty in

,

.

,

CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING

Identify other factors that might limit the accuracy of null measurements. Would the use of a digital device that is
more sensitive than a galvanometer improve the accuracy of null measurements?
Solution
One factor would be resistance in the wires and connections in a null measurement. These are impossible to make
zero, and they can change over time. Another factor would be temperature variations in resistance, which can be
reduced but not completely eliminated by choice of material. Digital devices sensitive to smaller currents than
analog devices do improve the accuracy of null measurements because they allow you to get the current closer to
zero.

21.6 DC Circuits Containing Resistors and Capacitors

• Explain the importance of the time constant, τ , and calculate the time constant for a given resistance and

capacitance.

• Explain why batteries in a flashlight gradually lose power and the light dims over time.
• Describe what happens to a graph of the voltage across a capacitor over time as it charges.
• Explain how a timing circuit works and list some applications.
• Calculate the necessary speed of a strobe flash needed to “stop” the movement of an object over a particular

length.

When you use a flash camera, it takes a few seconds to charge the capacitor that powers the flash. The light flash
discharges the capacitor in a tiny fraction of a second. Why does charging take longer than discharging? This
question and a number of other phenomena that involve charging and discharging capacitors are discussed in this
module.

RC Circuits

An RCcircuit is one containing a resistor Rand a capacitor C. The capacitor is an electrical component that stores
electric charge.

Figure 21.37 shows a simple RCcircuit that employs a DC (direct current) voltage source. The capacitor is initially
uncharged. As soon as the switch is closed, current flows to and from the initially uncharged capacitor. As charge
increases on the capacitor plates, there is increasing opposition to the flow of charge by the repulsion of like charges
on each plate.

Access for free at openstax.org

21.6 • DC Circuits Containing Resistors and Capacitors

935

In terms of voltage, this is because voltage across the capacitor is given by
charge stored on each plate and
maximum emf when fully charged. The current thus decreases from its initial value of

is the amount of
is the capacitance. This voltage opposes the battery, growing from zero to the

to zero as the

, where

voltage on the capacitor reaches the same value as the emf. When there is no current, there is no
the voltage on the capacitor must then equal the emf of the voltage source. This can also be explained with
Kirchhoff’s second rule (the loop rule), discussed in Kirchhoff’s Rules, which says that the algebraic sum of changes
in potential around any closed loop must be zero.

drop, and so

The initial current is

, because all of the

drop is in the resistance. Therefore, the smaller the resistance,

the faster a given capacitor will be charged. Note that the internal resistance of the voltage source is included in ,
as are the resistances of the capacitor and the connecting wires. In the flash camera scenario above, when the
batteries powering the camera begin to wear out, their internal resistance rises, reducing the current and
lengthening the time it takes to get ready for the next flash.

circuit with an initially uncharged capacitor. Current flows in the direction shown (opposite of electron flow) as

FIGURE 21.37 (a) An
soon as the switch is closed. Mutual repulsion of like charges in the capacitor progressively slows the flow as the capacitor is charged,
stopping the current when the capacitor is fully charged and
switch closing at time
the capacitor, and is the

. (Note that in the two parts of the figure, the capital script E stands for emf,

. (b) A graph of voltage across the capacitor versus time, with the

stands for the charge stored on

time constant.)

Voltage on the capacitor is initially zero and rises rapidly at first, since the initial current is a maximum. Figure
21.37(b) shows a graph of capacitor voltage versus time ( ) starting when the switch is closed at
approaches emf asymptotically, since the closer it gets to emf the less current flows. The equation for voltage
versus time when charging a capacitor

, derived using calculus, is

through a resistor

. The voltage

21.77

is the voltage across the capacitor, emf is equal to the emf of the DC voltage source, and the exponential e

where
= 2.718 … is the base of the natural logarithm. Note that the units of

are seconds. We define

21.78

where (the Greek letter tau) is called the time constant for an
allows the capacitor to charge faster. This is reasonable, since a larger current flows through a smaller resistance. It
, the less time needed to charge it. Both factors are contained in
is also reasonable that the smaller the capacitor

circuit. As noted before, a small resistance

.

More quantitatively, consider what happens when

. Then the voltage on the capacitor is

21.79

, the voltage rises to 0.632 of its final value. The voltage will rise 0.632 of the
This means that in the time
remainder in the next time . It is a characteristic of the exponential function that the final value is never reached,
but 0.632 of the remainder to that value is achieved in every time,
,
then, the final value is very nearly achieved, as the graph in Figure 21.37(b) illustrates.

. In just a few multiples of the time constant

Discharging a Capacitor

Discharging a capacitor through a resistor proceeds in a similar fashion, as Figure 21.38 illustrates. Initially, the

current is

, driven by the initial voltage

on the capacitor. As the voltage decreases, the current and

936

21 • Circuits and DC Instruments

hence the rate of discharge decreases, implying another exponential formula for
a capacitor

being discharged through a resistor

is found to be

. Using calculus, the voltage

on

21.80

FIGURE 21.38 (a) Closing the switch discharges the capacitor
drives the current. (b) A graph of voltage across the capacitor versus time, with
falling a fixed fraction of the way to zero in each subsequent time constant

.

through the resistor

. Mutual repulsion of like charges on each plate
. The voltage decreases exponentially,
at

The graph in Figure 21.38(b) is an example of this exponential decay. Again, the time constant is
resistance
capacitance requires less time to discharge, since less charge is stored. In the first time interval
switch is closed, the voltage falls to 0.368 of its initial value, since

allows the capacitor to discharge in a small time, since the current is larger. Similarly, a small

.

. A small

after the

During each successive time , the voltage falls to 0.368 of its preceding value. In a few multiples of
becomes very close to zero, as indicated by the graph in Figure 21.38(b).

, the voltage

Now we can explain why the flash camera in our scenario takes so much longer to charge than discharge; the
resistance while charging is significantly greater than while discharging. The internal resistance of the battery
accounts for most of the resistance while charging. As the battery ages, the increasing internal resistance makes the
charging process even slower. (You may have noticed this.)

The flash discharge is through a low-resistance ionized gas in the flash tube and proceeds very rapidly. Flash
photographs, such as in Figure 21.39, can capture a brief instant of a rapid motion because the flash can be less
than a microsecond in duration. Such flashes can be made extremely intense.

During World War II, nighttime reconnaissance photographs were made from the air with a single flash illuminating
more than a square kilometer of enemy territory. The brevity of the flash eliminated blurring due to the surveillance
aircraft’s motion. Today, an important use of intense flash lamps is to pump energy into a laser. The short intense
flash can rapidly energize a laser and allow it to reemit the energy in another form.

FIGURE 21.39 This stop-motion photograph of a rufous hummingbird (Selasphorus rufus) feeding on a flower was obtained with an
extremely brief and intense flash of light powered by the discharge of a capacitor through a gas. (credit: Dean E. Biggins, U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service)

Access for free at openstax.org

21.6 • DC Circuits Containing Resistors and Capacitors

937

EXAMPLE 21.6

Integrated Concept Problem: Calculating Capacitor Size—Strobe Lights
High-speed flash photography was pioneered by Doc Edgerton in the 1930s, while he was a professor of electrical
engineering at MIT. You might have seen examples of his work in the amazing shots of hummingbirds in motion, a
drop of milk splattering on a table, or a bullet penetrating an apple (see Figure 21.39). To stop the motion and
capture these pictures, one needs a high-intensity, very short pulsed flash, as mentioned earlier in this module.

Suppose one wished to capture the picture of a bullet (moving at
The duration of the flash is related to the
to succeed, if the resistance of the flash tube was

time constant,

. What size capacitor would one need in the

) that was passing through an apple.
circuit

? Assume the apple is a sphere with a diameter of

Strategy

We begin by identifying the physical principles involved. This example deals with the strobe light, as discussed
.
above. Figure 21.38 shows the circuit for this probe. The characteristic time of the strobe is given as

Solution

We wish to find , but we don’t know . We want the flash to be on only while the bullet traverses the apple. So we
need to use the kinematic equations that describe the relationship between distance , velocity , and time :

21.81

The bullet’s velocity is given as

, and the distance

is

The traverse time, then, is

We set this value for the crossing time equal to . Therefore,

×

21.82

21.83

(Note: Capacitance
that

can also be stated in units of seconds per ohm.)

is typically measured in farads,

, defined as Coulombs per volt. From the equation, we see

Discussion

(the traverse time of the bullet) is relatively easy to obtain today. Strobe lights have

The flash interval of
opened up new worlds from science to entertainment. The information from the picture of the apple and bullet was
used in the Warren Commission Report on the assassination of President John F. Kennedy in 1963 to confirm that
only one bullet was fired.

RC Circuits for Timing

circuits are commonly used for timing purposes. A mundane example of this is found in the ubiquitous
intermittent wiper systems of modern cars. The time between wipes is varied by adjusting the resistance in an
circuit. Another example of an
have battery-powered flashing lights. (See Figure 21.40 for a timing circuit.)

circuit is found in novelty jewelry, Halloween costumes, and various toys that

A more crucial use of
circuits for timing purposes is in the artificial pacemaker, used to control heart rate. The
heart rate is normally controlled by electrical signals generated by the sino-atrial (SA) node, which is on the wall of
the right atrium chamber. This causes the muscles to contract and pump blood. Sometimes the heart rhythm is
abnormal and the heartbeat is too high or too low.

The artificial pacemaker is inserted near the heart to provide electrical signals to the heart when needed with the

938

21 • Circuits and DC Instruments

appropriate time constant. Pacemakers have sensors that detect body motion and breathing to increase the heart
rate during exercise to meet the body’s increased needs for blood and oxygen.

FIGURE 21.40 (a) The lamp in this
circuit ordinarily has a very high resistance, so that the battery charges the capacitor as if the lamp
were not there. When the voltage reaches a threshold value, a current flows through the lamp that dramatically reduces its resistance, and
the capacitor discharges through the lamp as if the battery and charging resistor were not there. Once discharged, the process starts again,
with the flash period determined by the

. (b) A graph of voltage versus time for this circuit.

constant

EXAMPLE 21.7

Calculating Time: RCCircuit in a Heart Defibrillator
A heart defibrillator is used to resuscitate an accident victim by discharging a capacitor through the trunk of her
body. A simplified version of the circuit is seen in Figure 21.38. (a) What is the time constant if an
is used and the path resistance through her body is
it take to decline to

capacitor
? (b) If the initial voltage is 10.0 kV, how long does

?

Strategy

Since the resistance and capacitance are given, it is straightforward to multiply them to give the time constant asked
for in part (a). To find the time for the voltage to decline to
by 0.368 until a voltage less than or equal to

is obtained. Each multiplication corresponds to a time of

, we repeatedly multiply the initial voltage

seconds.

Solution for (a)

The time constant
remembering that units for a farad can be expressed as

is given by the equation

) gives

. Entering the given values for resistance and capacitance (and

Solution for (b)

In the first 8.00 ms, the voltage (10.0 kV) declines to 0.368 of its initial value. That is:

21.84

21.85

(Notice that we carry an extra digit for each intermediate calculation.) After another 8.00 ms, we multiply by 0.368
again, and the voltage is

21.86

Access for free at openstax.org

21.6 • DC Circuits Containing Resistors and Capacitors

939

Similarly, after another 8.00 ms, the voltage is

′

21.87

Discussion

So after only 24.0 ms, the voltage is down to 498 V, or 4.98% of its original value.Such brief times are useful in heart
defibrillation, because the brief but intense current causes a brief but effective contraction of the heart. The actual
circuit in a heart defibrillator is slightly more complex than the one in Figure 21.38, to compensate for magnetic and
AC effects that will be covered in Magnetism.

CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING

When is the potential difference across a capacitor an emf?
Solution
Only when the current being drawn from or put into the capacitor is zero. Capacitors, like batteries, have internal
resistance, so their output voltage is not an emf unless current is zero. This is difficult to measure in practice so we
refer to a capacitor’s voltage rather than its emf. But the source of potential difference in a capacitor is fundamental
and it is an emf.

PHET EXPLORATIONS

Circuit Construction Kit (DC only)
An electronics kit in your computer! Build circuits with resistors, light bulbs, batteries, and switches. Take
measurements with the realistic ammeter and voltmeter. View the circuit as a schematic diagram, or switch to a life-
like view.

Click to view content (https://openstax.org/books/college-physics-2e/pages/21-6-dc-circuits-containing-resistors-
and-capacitors)

940

21 • Glossary

Glossary

ammeter an instrument that measures current
analog meter a measuring instrument that gives a
readout in the form of a needle movement over a
marked gauge

bridge device a device that forms a bridge between
two branches of a circuit; some bridge devices are
used to make null measurements in circuits
capacitance the maximum amount of electric

potential energy that can be stored (or separated)
for a given electric potential

capacitor an electrical component used to store
energy by separating electric charge on two
opposing plates

conservation laws require that energy and charge be

conserved in a system

current

the flow of charge through an electric circuit

past a given point of measurement

current sensitivity the maximum current that a

galvanometer can read

digital meter a measuring instrument that gives a

readout in a digital form
electromotive force (emf)

the potential difference of

a source of electricity when no current is flowing;
measured in volts

full-scale deflection the maximum deflection of a
galvanometer needle, also known as current
sensitivity; a galvanometer with a full-scale
deflection of
needle when

has a maximum deflection of its
flows through it

galvanometer an analog measuring device, denoted
by G, that measures current flow using a needle
deflection caused by a magnetic field force acting
upon a current-carrying wire

internal resistance the amount of resistance within

the voltage source

Joule’s law the relationship between potential
electrical power, voltage, and resistance in an
electrical circuit, given by:

junction rule Kirchhoff’s first rule, which applies the
conservation of charge to a junction; current is the
flow of charge; thus, whatever charge flows into the
junction must flow out; the rule can be stated

Kirchhoff’s rules a set of two rules, based on

conservation of charge and energy, governing
current and changes in potential in an electric circuit
loop rule Kirchhoff’s second rule, which states that in
a closed loop, whatever energy is supplied by emf
must be transferred into other forms by devices in
the loop, since there are no other ways in which

Access for free at openstax.org

energy can be transferred into or out of the circuit.
Thus, the emf equals the sum of the
drops in the loop and can be stated:

(voltage)

null measurements methods of measuring current

and voltage more accurately by balancing the circuit
so that no current flows through the measurement
device

Ohm’s law the relationship between current, voltage,

and resistance within an electrical circuit:

ohmmeter an instrument that applies a voltage to a
resistance, measures the current, calculates the
resistance using Ohm’s law, and provides a readout
of this calculated resistance

parallel

the wiring of resistors or other components

in an electrical circuit such that each component
receives an equal voltage from the power source;
often pictured in a ladder-shaped diagram, with
each component on a rung of the ladder
potential difference the difference in electric

potential between two points in an electric circuit,
measured in volts

potentiometer a null measurement device for

measuring potentials (voltages)

RC circuit a circuit that contains both a resistor and a

capacitor

resistance causing a loss of electrical power in a

circuit

resistor a component that provides resistance to the

current flowing through an electrical circuit

series a sequence of resistors or other components

wired into a circuit one after the other

shunt resistance a small resistance

placed in

parallel with a galvanometer G to produce an
ammeter; the larger the current to be measured, the
smaller must be; most of the current flowing
through the meter is shunted through
the galvanometer

to protect

terminal voltage the voltage measured across the
terminals of a source of potential difference
voltage the electrical potential energy per unit

charge; electric pressure created by a power source,
such as a battery

voltage drop the loss of electrical power as a current
travels through a resistor, wire or other component

voltmeter an instrument that measures voltage
Wheatstone bridge a null measurement device for

calculating resistance by balancing potential drops
in a circuit

21 • Section Summary

941

Section Summary

21.1 Resistors in Series and Parallel

21.3 Kirchhoff’s Rules

• The total resistance of an electrical circuit with
resistors wired in a series is the sum of the
individual resistances:

• Each resistor in a series circuit has the same

amount of current flowing through it.

• Kirchhoff’s rules can be used to analyze any

circuit, simple or complex.

• Kirchhoff’s first rule—the junction rule: The sum of
all currents entering a junction must equal the sum
of all currents leaving the junction.

• The voltage drop, or power dissipation, across

• Kirchhoff’s second rule—the loop rule: The

each individual resistor in a series is different, and
their combined total adds up to the power source
input.

algebraic sum of changes in potential around any
closed circuit path (loop) must be zero.

• The two rules are based, respectively, on the laws

• The total resistance of an electrical circuit with

of conservation of charge and energy.

resistors wired in parallel is less than the lowest
resistance of any of the components and can be
determined using the formula:

• When calculating potential and current using

Kirchhoff’s rules, a set of conventions must be
followed for determining the correct signs of
various terms.

• The simpler series and parallel rules are special

• Each resistor in a parallel circuit has the same full

cases of Kirchhoff’s rules.

voltage of the source applied to it.

•

• The current flowing through each resistor in a
parallel circuit is different, depending on the
resistance.
If a more complex connection of resistors is a
combination of series and parallel, it can be
reduced to a single equivalent resistance by
identifying its various parts as series or parallel,
reducing each to its equivalent, and continuing
until a single resistance is eventually reached.

21.2 Electromotive Force: Terminal Voltage

• All voltage sources have two fundamental parts—a
source of electrical energy that has a characteristic
electromotive force (emf), and an internal
resistance .

• The emf is the potential difference of a source

when no current is flowing.

21.4 DC Voltmeters and Ammeters

• Voltmeters measure voltage, and ammeters

measure current.

• A voltmeter is placed in parallel with the voltage
source to receive full voltage and must have a
large resistance to limit its effect on the circuit.

• An ammeter is placed in series to get the full

current flowing through a branch and must have a
small resistance to limit its effect on the circuit.
• Both can be based on the combination of a resistor
and a galvanometer, a device that gives an analog
reading of current.

• Standard voltmeters and ammeters alter the

circuit being measured and are thus limited in
accuracy.

21.5 Null Measurements

• The numerical value of the emf depends on the

• Null measurement techniques achieve greater

source of potential difference.

• The internal resistance of a voltage source

affects the output voltage when a current flows.
• The voltage output of a device is called its terminal

and is given by

voltage
is the electric current and is positive when flowing
away from the positive terminal of the voltage
source.

, where

• When multiple voltage sources are in series, their

internal resistances add and their emfs add
algebraically.

• Solar cells can be wired in series or parallel to

accuracy by balancing a circuit so that no current
flows through the measuring device.

• One such device, for determining voltage, is a

potentiometer.

• Another null measurement device, for determining

resistance, is the Wheatstone bridge.

• Other physical quantities can also be measured

with null measurement techniques.

21.6 DC Circuits Containing Resistors and
Capacitors

• An

circuit is one that has both a resistor and a

provide increased voltage or current, respectively.

capacitor.

• The time constant
• When an initially uncharged (

for an

circuit is
at

.

)

942

21 • Conceptual Questions

capacitor in series with a resistor is charged by a
DC voltage source, the voltage rises,
asymptotically approaching the emf of the voltage
source; as a function of time,

• Within the span of each time constant

, the

voltage rises by 0.632 of the remaining value,
approaching the final voltage asymptotically.

Conceptual Questions

•

•

If a capacitor with an initial voltage
is
discharged through a resistor starting at
then its voltage decreases exponentially as given
by

,

In each time constant
of its remaining initial value, approaching zero
asymptotically.

, the voltage falls by 0.368

21.1 Resistors in Series and Parallel

5. A student in a physics lab mistakenly wired a light

1. A switch has a variable resistance that is nearly zero
when closed and extremely large when open, and it
is placed in series with the device it controls.
Explain the effect the switch in Figure 21.41 has on
current when open and when closed.

bulb, battery, and switch as shown in Figure 21.42.
Explain why the bulb is on when the switch is open,
and off when the switch is closed. (Do not try
this—it is hard on the battery!)

FIGURE 21.42 A wiring mistake put this switch in parallel with
the device represented by
script E represents the voltage (or electromotive force) of the
battery.)

. (Note that in this diagram, the

6. Knowing that the severity of a shock depends on
the magnitude of the current through your body,
would you prefer to be in series or parallel with a
resistance, such as the heating element of a toaster,
if shocked by it? Explain.

7. Would your headlights dim when you start your

car’s engine if the wires in your automobile were
superconductors? (Do not neglect the battery’s
internal resistance.) Explain.

8. Some strings of holiday lights are wired in series to
save wiring costs. An old version utilized bulbs that
break the electrical connection, like an open switch,
when they burn out. If one such bulb burns out,
what happens to the others? If such a string
operates on 120 V and has 40 identical bulbs, what
is the normal operating voltage of each? Newer
versions use bulbs that short circuit, like a closed
switch, when they burn out. If one such bulb burns
out, what happens to the others? If such a string
operates on 120 V and has 39 remaining identical
bulbs, what is then the operating voltage of each?
9. If two household lightbulbs rated 60 W and 100 W
are connected in series to household power, which
will be brighter? Explain.

FIGURE 21.41 A switch is ordinarily in series with a resistance
and voltage source. Ideally, the switch has nearly zero
resistance when closed but has an extremely large resistance
when open. (Note that in this diagram, the script E represents
the voltage (or electromotive force) of the battery.)

2. What is the voltage across the open switch in Figure

21.41?

3. There is a voltage across an open switch, such as in
Figure 21.41. Why, then, is the power dissipated by
the open switch small?

4. Why is the power dissipated by a closed switch,

such as in Figure 21.41, small?

Access for free at openstax.org

21 • Conceptual Questions

943

21.3 Kirchhoff’s Rules

19. Can all of the currents going into the junction in

Figure 21.44 be positive? Explain.

FIGURE 21.44

20. Apply the junction rule to junction b in Figure

21.45. Is any new information gained by applying
the junction rule at e? (In the figure, each emf is
represented by script E.)

10. Suppose you are doing a physics lab that asks you
to put a resistor into a circuit, but all the resistors
supplied have a larger resistance than the
requested value. How would you connect the
available resistances to attempt to get the smaller
value asked for?

11. Before World War II, some radios got power

through a “resistance cord” that had a significant
resistance. Such a resistance cord reduces the
voltage to a desired level for the radio’s tubes and
the like, and it saves the expense of a transformer.
Explain why resistance cords become warm and
waste energy when the radio is on.

12. Some light bulbs have three power settings (not
including zero), obtained from multiple filaments
that are individually switched and wired in
parallel. What is the minimum number of
filaments needed for three power settings?

21.2 Electromotive Force: Terminal Voltage

13. Is every emf a potential difference? Is every

potential difference an emf? Explain.

14. Explain which battery is doing the charging and

which is being charged in Figure 21.43.

FIGURE 21.43

15. Given a battery, an assortment of resistors, and a
variety of voltage and current measuring devices,
describe how you would determine the internal
resistance of the battery.

16. Two different 12-V automobile batteries on a store
shelf are rated at 600 and 850 “cold cranking
amps.” Which has the smallest internal
resistance?

17. What are the advantages and disadvantages of
connecting batteries in series? In parallel?
18. Semitractor trucks use four large 12-V batteries.

The starter system requires 24 V, while normal
operation of the truck’s other electrical
components utilizes 12 V. How could the four
batteries be connected to produce 24 V? To
produce 12 V? Why is 24 V better than 12 V for
starting the truck’s engine (a very heavy load)?

FIGURE 21.45

21. (a) What is the potential difference going from

point a to point b in Figure 21.45? (b) What is the
potential difference going from c to b? (c) From e
to g? (d) From e to d?

22. Apply the loop rule to loop afedcba in Figure

21.45.

23. Apply the loop rule to loops abgefa and cbgedc in

Figure 21.45.

21.4 DC Voltmeters and Ammeters

24. Why should you not connect an ammeter directly

across a voltage source as shown in Figure 21.46?
(Note that script E in the figure stands for emf.)

FIGURE 21.46

944

21 • Conceptual Questions

25. Suppose you are using a multimeter (one designed
to measure a range of voltages, currents, and
resistances) to measure current in a circuit and
you inadvertently leave it in a voltmeter mode.
What effect will the meter have on the circuit?
What would happen if you were measuring voltage
but accidentally put the meter in the ammeter
mode?

31. The

time constant in heart defibrillation is

crucial to limiting the time the current flows. If the
capacitance in the defibrillation unit is fixed, how
would you manipulate resistance in the circuit to
adjust the
the applied voltage also be needed to ensure that
the current delivered has an appropriate value?

constant ? Would an adjustment of

32. When making an ECG measurement, it is

26. Specify the points to which you could connect a
voltmeter to measure the following potential
differences in Figure 21.47: (a) the potential difference
of the voltage source; (b) the potential difference
across
and
to each part.

; (d) across
. Note that there may be more than one answer

; (e) across

; (c) across

important to measure voltage variations over
small time intervals. The time is limited by the
constant of the circuit—it is not possible to
measure time variations shorter than
would you manipulate
allow the necessary measurements?

. How
in the circuit to

and

33. Draw two graphs of charge versus time on a
capacitor. Draw one for charging an initially
uncharged capacitor in series with a resistor, as in
the circuit in Figure 21.37, starting from
Draw the other for discharging a capacitor through
a resistor, as in the circuit in Figure 21.38, starting
at
two intervals of

, with an initial charge

. Show at least

.

.

34. When charging a capacitor, as discussed in

conjunction with Figure 21.37, how long does it
take for the voltage on the capacitor to reach emf?
Is this a problem?

35. When discharging a capacitor, as discussed in

conjunction with Figure 21.38, how long does it
take for the voltage on the capacitor to reach zero?
Is this a problem?

36. Referring to Figure 21.37, draw a graph of

potential difference across the resistor versus
time, showing at least two intervals of
a graph of current versus time for this situation.
37. A long, inexpensive extension cord is connected

. Also draw

from inside the house to a refrigerator outside.
The refrigerator doesn’t run as it should. What
might be the problem?

38. In Figure 21.40, does the graph indicate the time
constant is shorter for discharging than for
charging? Would you expect ionized gas to have
to get a
low resistance? How would you adjust
longer time between flashes? Would adjusting
affect the discharge time?

FIGURE 21.47

27. To measure currents in Figure 21.47, you would
replace a wire between two points with an
ammeter. Specify the points between which you
would place an ammeter to measure the
following: (a) the total current; (b) the current
flowing through

; (d) through

; (c) through

. Note that there may be more than one answer

to each part.

21.5 Null Measurements

28. Why can a null measurement be more accurate

than one using standard voltmeters and
ammeters? What factors limit the accuracy of null
measurements?

29. If a potentiometer is used to measure cell emfs on
the order of a few volts, why is it most accurate for
the standard
magnitude and the resistances to be in the range
of a few ohms?

to be the same order of

21.6 DC Circuits Containing Resistors and
Capacitors

30. Regarding the units involved in the relationship

, verify that the units of resistance times

capacitance are time, that is,

.

Access for free at openstax.org

21 • Problems & Exercises

945

7. Referring to the example combining series and
parallel circuits and Figure 21.6, calculate
following two different ways: (a) from the known
values of
. In
both parts explicitly show how you follow the steps
in the Problem-Solving Strategies for Series and
Parallel Resistors.

; (b) using Ohm’s law for

in the

and

8. Referring to Figure 21.6: (a) Calculate

and note

found in the first two

how it compares with
example problems in this module. (b) Find the total
power supplied by the source and compare it with
the sum of the powers dissipated by the resistors.

9. Refer to Figure 21.7 and the discussion of lights
dimming when a heavy appliance comes on. (a)
Given the voltage source is 120 V, the wire
resistance is
75.0 W, what power will the bulb dissipate if a total
of 15.0 A passes through the wires when the motor
comes on? Assume negligible change in bulb
resistance. (b) What power is consumed by the
motor?

, and the bulb is nominally

39. An electronic apparatus may have large capacitors

at high voltage in the power supply section,
presenting a shock hazard even when the
apparatus is switched off. A “bleeder resistor” is
therefore placed across such a capacitor, as
shown schematically in Figure 21.48, to bleed the
charge from it after the apparatus is off. Why must
the bleeder resistance be much greater than the
effective resistance of the rest of the circuit? How
does this affect the time constant for discharging
the capacitor?

FIGURE 21.48 A bleeder resistor
capacitor in this electronic device once it is switched off.

discharges the

Problems & Exercises

21.1 Resistors in Series and Parallel

Note: Data taken from figures can be assumed to be
accurate to three significant digits.

1. (a) What is the resistance of ten

resistors

connected in series? (b) In parallel?

2. (a) What is the resistance of a
, and a
series? (b) In parallel?

resistor connected in

, a

3. What are the largest and smallest resistances you

can obtain by connecting a

, a

, and a

resistor together?

4. An 1800-W toaster, a 1400-W electric frying pan,
and a 75-W lamp are plugged into the same outlet
in a 15-A, 120-V circuit. (The three devices are in
parallel when plugged into the same socket.). (a)
What current is drawn by each device? (b) Will this
combination blow the 15-A fuse?

5. Your car’s 30.0-W headlight and 2.40-kW starter
are ordinarily connected in parallel in a 12.0-V
system. What power would one headlight and the
starter consume if connected in series to a 12.0-V
battery? (Neglect any other resistance in the circuit
and any change in resistance in the two devices.)

6. (a) Given a 48.0-V battery and

and

resistors, find the current and power for each when
connected in series. (b) Repeat when the
resistances are in parallel.

946

21 • Problems & Exercises

10. A 240-kV power transmission line carrying

15. Carbon-zinc dry cells (sometimes referred to as

non-alkaline cells) have an emf of 1.54 V, and they
are produced as single cells or in various
combinations to form other voltages. (a) How
many 1.54-V cells are needed to make the
common 9-V battery used in many small
electronic devices? (b) What is the actual emf of
the approximately 9-V battery? (c) Discuss how
internal resistance in the series connection of cells
will affect the terminal voltage of this
approximately 9-V battery.

16. What is the output voltage of a 3.0000-V lithium

cell in a digital wristwatch that draws 0.300 mA, if
the cell’s internal resistance is

?

17. (a) What is the terminal voltage of a large 1.54-V

carbon-zinc dry cell used in a physics lab to supply
2.00 A to a circuit, if the cell’s internal resistance
? (b) How much electrical power does
is
the cell produce? (c) What power goes to its load?

18. What is the internal resistance of an automobile
battery that has an emf of 12.0 V and a terminal
voltage of 15.0 V while a current of 8.00 A is
charging it?

19. (a) Find the terminal voltage of a 12.0-V

motorcycle battery having a
resistance, if it is being charged by a current of
10.0 A. (b) What is the output voltage of the
battery charger?

internal

20. A car battery with a 12-V emf and an internal
is being charged with a
resistance of
current of 60 A. Note that in this process the
battery is being charged. (a) What is the potential
difference across its terminals? (b) At what rate is
thermal energy being dissipated in the battery? (c)
At what rate is electric energy being converted to
chemical energy? (d) What are the answers to (a)
and (b) when the battery is used to supply 60 A to
the starter motor?

21. The hot resistance of a flashlight bulb is

,

and it is run by a 1.58-V alkaline cell having a
internal resistance. (a) What current
flows? (b) Calculate the power supplied to the
bulb using

. (c) Is this power the same as

calculated using

?

is hung from grounded metal towers

by ceramic insulators, each having a

×

resistance. Figure 21.49. (a) What

is the resistance to ground of 100 of these
insulators? (b) Calculate the power dissipated by
100 of them. (c) What fraction of the power
carried by the line is this? Explicitly show how you
follow the steps in the Problem-Solving Strategies
for Series and Parallel Resistors.

FIGURE 21.49 High-voltage (240-kV) transmission line
carrying
transmission tower. The row of ceramic insulators provide

is hung from a grounded metal

of resistance each.

11. Show that if two resistors

and

are

): (a) Their series resistance is very
. (b)

combined and one is much greater than the other
(
nearly equal to the greater resistance
Their parallel resistance is very nearly equal to
smaller resistance
.
12. Unreasonable Results

Two resistors, one having a resistance of
are connected in parallel to produce a total
resistance of
second resistance? (b) What is unreasonable
about this result? (c) Which assumptions are
unreasonable or inconsistent?

. (a) What is the value of the

,

13. Unreasonable Results

Two resistors, one having a resistance of
are connected in series to produce a total
resistance of
. (a) What is the value of
the second resistance? (b) What is unreasonable
about this result? (c) Which assumptions are
unreasonable or inconsistent?

,

21.2 Electromotive Force: Terminal Voltage

14. Standard automobile batteries have six lead-acid
cells in series, creating a total emf of 12.0 V. What
is the emf of an individual lead-acid cell?

Access for free at openstax.org

22. The label on a portable radio recommends the use
of rechargeable nickel-cadmium cells (nicads),
although they have a 1.25-V emf while alkaline
cells have a 1.58-V emf. The radio has a
resistance. (a) Draw a circuit diagram of the radio
and its batteries. Now, calculate the power
delivered to the radio. (b) When using Nicad cells
each having an internal resistance of
When using alkaline cells each having an internal
resistance of
seem significant, considering that the radio’s
effective resistance is lowered when its volume is
turned up?

. (d) Does this difference

. (c)

23. An automobile starter motor has an equivalent

and is supplied by a 12.0-V
internal resistance. (a)

resistance of
battery with a
What is the current to the motor? (b) What voltage
is applied to it? (c) What power is supplied to the
motor? (d) Repeat these calculations for when the
battery connections are corroded and add

21 • Problems & Exercises

947

27. Electric fish generate current with biological cells

called electroplaques, which are physiological emf
devices. The electroplaques in the South
American eel are arranged in 140 rows, each row
stretching horizontally along the body and each
containing 5000 electroplaques. Each
electroplaque has an emf of 0.15 V and internal
resistance of
fish has resistance of
can the eel produce in water from near its head to
near its tail?

. If the water surrounding the

, how much current

28. Integrated Concepts

A 12.0-V emf automobile battery has a terminal
voltage of 16.0 V when being charged by a current
of 10.0 A. (a) What is the battery’s internal
resistance? (b) What power is dissipated inside
the battery? (c) At what rate (in
) will its
temperature increase if its mass is 20.0 kg and it
has a specific heat of
assuming no heat escapes?

,

to the circuit. (Significant problems are

29. Unreasonable Results

caused by even small amounts of unwanted
resistance in low-voltage, high-current
applications.)

24. A child’s electronic toy is supplied by three 1.58-V

alkaline cells having internal resistances of

in series with a 1.53-V carbon-zinc dry

internal resistance. The load

cell having a
resistance is
. (a) Draw a circuit diagram of
the toy and its batteries. (b) What current flows?
(c) How much power is supplied to the load? (d)
What is the internal resistance of the dry cell if it
goes bad, resulting in only 0.500 W being supplied
to the load?

internal

A 1.58-V alkaline cell with a
resistance is supplying 8.50 A to a load. (a) What
is its terminal voltage? (b) What is the value of the
load resistance? (c) What is unreasonable about
these results? (d) Which assumptions are
unreasonable or inconsistent?

30. Unreasonable Results

(a) What is the internal resistance of a 1.54-V dry
cell that supplies 1.00 W of power to a
bulb? (b) What is unreasonable about this result?
(c) Which assumptions are unreasonable or
inconsistent?

25. (a) What is the internal resistance of a voltage

21.3 Kirchhoff’s Rules

31. Apply the loop rule to loop abcdefgha in Figure

21.25.

32. Apply the loop rule to loop aedcba in Figure 21.25.
33. Verify the second equation in Example 21.5 by

substituting the values found for the currents
and

.

34. Verify the third equation in Example 21.5 by

substituting the values found for the currents
and

.

source if its terminal voltage drops by 2.00 V when
the current supplied increases by 5.00 A? (b) Can
the emf of the voltage source be found with the
information supplied?

26. A person with body resistance between his hands
of
accidentally grasps the terminals of a
20.0-kV power supply. (Do NOT do this!) (a) Draw
a circuit diagram to represent the situation. (b) If
the internal resistance of the power supply is

, what is the current through his body? (c)

What is the power dissipated in his body? (d) If the
power supply is to be made safe by increasing its
internal resistance, what should the internal
resistance be for the maximum current in this
situation to be 1.00 mA or less? (e) Will this
modification compromise the effectiveness of the
power supply for driving low-resistance devices?
Explain your reasoning.

948

21 • Problems & Exercises

35. Apply the junction rule at point a in Figure 21.50.

21.4 DC Voltmeters and Ammeters

42. What is the sensitivity of the galvanometer (that is,
what current gives a full-scale deflection) inside a
voltmeter that has a
30.0-V scale?

resistance on its

43. What is the sensitivity of the galvanometer (that is,
what current gives a full-scale deflection) inside a
voltmeter that has a
100-V scale?

resistance on its

44. Find the resistance that must be placed in series

galvanometer having a

with a
sensitivity (the same as the one discussed in the
text) to allow it to be used as a voltmeter with a
0.100-V full-scale reading.

45. Find the resistance that must be placed in series

galvanometer having a

with a
sensitivity (the same as the one discussed in the
text) to allow it to be used as a voltmeter with a
3000-V full-scale reading. Include a circuit
diagram with your solution.

46. Find the resistance that must be placed in parallel

galvanometer having a

with a
sensitivity (the same as the one discussed in the
text) to allow it to be used as an ammeter with a
10.0-A full-scale reading. Include a circuit
diagram with your solution.

47. Find the resistance that must be placed in parallel

galvanometer having a

with a
sensitivity (the same as the one discussed in the
text) to allow it to be used as an ammeter with a
300-mA full-scale reading.

48. Find the resistance that must be placed in series

galvanometer having a

with a
sensitivity to allow it to be used as a voltmeter
with: (a) a 300-V full-scale reading, and (b) a
0.300-V full-scale reading.

49. Find the resistance that must be placed in parallel

galvanometer having a

with a
sensitivity to allow it to be used as an ammeter
with: (a) a 20.0-A full-scale reading, and (b) a
100-mA full-scale reading.

FIGURE 21.50

36. Apply the loop rule to loop abcdefghija in Figure

21.50.

37. Apply the loop rule to loop akledcba in Figure

21.50.

38. Find the currents flowing in the circuit in Figure

21.50. Explicitly show how you follow the steps in
the Problem-Solving Strategies for Series and
Parallel Resistors.

39. Solve Example 21.5, but use loop abcdefgha

instead of loop akledcba. Explicitly show how you
follow the steps in the Problem-Solving Strategies
for Series and Parallel Resistors.

40. Find the currents flowing in the circuit in Figure

21.45.

41. Unreasonable Results

Consider the circuit in Figure 21.51, and suppose
that the emfs are unknown and the currents are
,
given to be

, and

. (a) Could you find the emfs? (b)

What is wrong with the assumptions?

FIGURE 21.51

Access for free at openstax.org

50. Suppose you measure the terminal voltage of a

55. Unreasonable Results

21 • Problems & Exercises

949

by placing a

1.585-V alkaline cell having an internal resistance
of
voltmeter across
its terminals. (See Figure 21.52.) (a) What current
flows? (b) Find the terminal voltage. (c) To see
how close the measured terminal voltage is to the
emf, calculate their ratio.

FIGURE 21.52

51. Suppose you measure the terminal voltage of a

by placing a

3.200-V lithium cell having an internal resistance
of
voltmeter across
its terminals. (a) What current flows? (b) Find the
terminal voltage. (c) To see how close the
measured terminal voltage is to the emf, calculate
their ratio.

52. A certain ammeter has a resistance of

×

on its 3.00-A scale and contains a

galvanometer. What is the sensitivity of

the galvanometer?

53. A

voltmeter is placed in parallel with a

resistor in a circuit. (a) Draw a circuit

diagram of the connection. (b) What is the
resistance of the combination? (c) If the voltage
across the combination is kept the same as it was
across the
resistor alone, what is the
percent increase in current? (d) If the current
through the combination is kept the same as it
was through the
resistor alone, what is
the percentage decrease in voltage? (e) Are the
changes found in parts (c) and (d) significant?
Discuss.

54. A

ammeter is placed in series with a
resistor in a circuit. (a) Draw a circuit

diagram of the connection. (b) Calculate the
resistance of the combination. (c) If the voltage is
kept the same across the combination as it was
through the
resistor alone, what is the
percent decrease in current? (d) If the current is
kept the same through the combination as it was
through the
resistor alone, what is the
percent increase in voltage? (e) Are the changes
found in parts (c) and (d) significant? Discuss.

Suppose you have a

galvanometer with a

sensitivity. (a) What resistance would you

put in series with it to allow it to be used as a
voltmeter that has a full-scale deflection for 0.500
mV? (b) What is unreasonable about this result?
(c) Which assumptions are responsible?

56. Unreasonable Results

galvanometer having a

(a) What resistance would you put in parallel with
a
sensitivity to allow it to be used as an ammeter
that has a full-scale deflection for
? (b)
What is unreasonable about this result? (c) Which
assumptions are responsible?

21.5 Null Measurements

57. What is the

of a cell being measured in a

potentiometer, if the standard cell’s emf is 12.0 V
and the potentiometer balances for
and

?
of a dry cell for which a

58. Calculate the

potentiometer is balanced when
while an alkaline standard cell with an emf of
1.600 V requires
potentiometer.

to balance the

,

59. When an unknown resistance

is placed in a
Wheatstone bridge, it is possible to balance the
bridge by adjusting

. What is

to be

if

?

is

, and

60. To what value must you adjust

to balance a
Wheatstone bridge, if the unknown resistance
is

,
61. (a) What is the unknown
that balances when
when
is
The same
potentiometer, which now balances when

is placed in the same

is
?
in a potentiometer
, and balances

for a standard 3.000-V emf? (b)

is

is

for a standard emf of 3.100 V. At what
will the potentiometer balance?

resistance

62. Suppose you want to measure resistances in the

range from

to

using a Wheatstone

bridge that has

. Over what range

should

be adjustable?

21.6 DC Circuits Containing Resistors and
Capacitors

63. The timing device in an automobile’s intermittent

wiper system is based on an
and utilizes a
resistor. Over what range must
to achieve time constants from 2.00 to 15.0 s?

time constant
capacitor and a variable

be made to vary

71. Figure 21.53 shows how a bleeder resistor is used
to discharge a capacitor after an electronic device
is shut off, allowing a person to work on the
electronics with less risk of shock. (a) What is the
time constant? (b) How long will it take to reduce
the voltage on the capacitor to 0.250% (5% of
5%) of its full value once discharge begins? (c) If
through a
the capacitor is charged to a voltage

resistance, calculate the time it takes to

rise to

(This is about two time constants.)

FIGURE 21.53

72. Using the exact exponential treatment, find how

much time is required to discharge a
capacitor through a
of its original voltage.

resistor down to 1.00%

73. Using the exact exponential treatment, find how
much time is required to charge an initially
uncharged 100-pF capacitor through a
resistor to 90.0% of its final voltage.

74. Integrated Concepts

If you wish to take a picture of a bullet traveling at
500 m/s, then a very brief flash of light produced
by an
discharge through a flash tube can limit
blurring. Assuming 1.00 mm of motion during one
constant is acceptable, and given that the

flash is driven by a
resistance in the flash tube?

capacitor, what is the

75. Integrated Concepts

A flashing lamp in a Christmas earring is based on
an
discharge of a capacitor through its
resistance. The effective duration of the flash is
0.250 s, during which it produces an average
0.500 W from an average 3.00 V. (a) What energy
does it dissipate? (b) How much charge moves
through the lamp? (c) Find the capacitance. (d)
What is the resistance of the lamp?

950

21 • Problems & Exercises

64. A heart pacemaker fires 72 times a minute, each
time a 25.0-nF capacitor is charged (by a battery
in series with a resistor) to 0.632 of its full voltage.
What is the value of the resistance?

65. The duration of a photographic flash is related to

for a

time constant, which is

an
certain camera. (a) If the resistance of the flash
lamp is
during discharge, what is the
size of the capacitor supplying its energy? (b)
What is the time constant for charging the
capacitor, if the charging resistance is

?

66. A 2.00- and a

capacitor can be connected

in series or parallel, as can a 25.0- and a
resistor. Calculate the four
possible from connecting the resulting
capacitance and resistance in series.

time constants

67. After two time constants, what percentage of the
final voltage, emf, is on an initially uncharged
, charged through a resistance ?
capacitor

68. A

resistor, an uncharged

capacitor,
and a 6.16-V emf are connected in series. (a) What
is the initial current? (b) What is the
constant? (c) What is the current after one time
constant? (d) What is the voltage on the capacitor
after one time constant?

time

69. A heart defibrillator being used on a patient has an
time constant of 10.0 ms due to the

resistance of the patient and the capacitance of
the defibrillator. (a) If the defibrillator has an

capacitance, what is the resistance of the

path through the patient? (You may neglect the
capacitance of the patient and the resistance of
the defibrillator.) (b) If the initial voltage is 12.0
kV, how long does it take to decline to

?

70. An ECG monitor must have an

time constant

to be able to measure

less than
variations in voltage over small time intervals. (a)
If the resistance of the circuit (due mostly to that
of the patient’s chest) is
maximum capacitance of the circuit? (b) Would it
be difficult in practice to limit the capacitance to
less than the value found in (a)?

, what is the

Access for free at openstax.org

76. Integrated Concepts

79. Construct Your Own Problem

21 • Problems & Exercises

951

capacitor charged to 450 V is

A
discharged through a
the time constant. (b) Calculate the temperature
increase of the resistor, given that its mass is 2.50
g and its specific heat is

resistor. (a) Find

, noting that

most of the thermal energy is retained in the short
time of the discharge. (c) Calculate the new
resistance, assuming it is pure carbon. (d) Does
this change in resistance seem significant?

77. Unreasonable Results

(a) Calculate the capacitance needed to get an
time constant of
resistor. (b) What is unreasonable about this
result? (c) Which assumptions are responsible?

with a

78. Construct Your Own Problem

Consider a camera’s flash unit. Construct a
problem in which you calculate the size of the
capacitor that stores energy for the flash lamp.
Among the things to be considered are the voltage
applied to the capacitor, the energy needed in the
flash and the associated charge needed on the
capacitor, the resistance of the flash lamp during
discharge, and the desired

time constant.

Consider a rechargeable lithium cell that is to be
used to power a camcorder. Construct a problem
in which you calculate the internal resistance of
the cell during normal operation. Also, calculate
the minimum voltage output of a battery charger
to be used to recharge your lithium cell. Among
the things to be considered are the emf and useful
terminal voltage of a lithium cell and the current it
should be able to supply to a camcorder.
80. Critical Thinking A circuit has a voltage source

and a

producing
resistor. (a) If the circuit contains nothing else,
how much power is dissipated by the resistor? (b)
A second
resistor is added in parallel
to the first resistor. Now how much power is
dissipated by the resistors? (c) Now place the two
resistors in series. How much power is dissipated
by the resistors? (d) Why would a parallel
arrangement of resistors dissipate more power
than a series arrangement of resistors of the same
value? (e) Which delivers more energy in a given
time period, the parallel combination of resistors,
the series combination of resistors, or is the
energy delivered in a given time period the same?

