CHAPTER 20
Electric Current, Resistance, and Ohm's Law

FIGURE 20.1 Electric energy in massive quantities is transmitted from this hydroelectric facility, the Srisailam power station located along
the Krishna River in India, by the movement of charge—that is, by electric current. (credit: Chintohere, Wikimedia Commons)

CHAPTER OUTLINE

20.1 Current

20.2 Ohm’s Law: Resistance and Simple Circuits

20.3 Resistance and Resistivity

20.4 Electric Power and Energy

20.5 Alternating Current versus Direct Current

20.6 Electric Hazards and the Human Body

20.7 Nerve Conduction–Electrocardiograms

INTRODUCTION TO ELECTRIC CURRENT, RESISTANCE, AND OHM'S LAW
calculator, nerve impulses carrying signals of vision to the brain, an ultrasound device sending a signal to a
computer screen, the brain sending a message for a baby to twitch its toes, an electric train pulling its load over a
mountain pass, a hydroelectric plant sending energy to metropolitan and rural users—these and many other
examples of electricity involve electric current, the movement of charge. Humankind has indeed harnessed
electricity, the basis of technology, to improve our quality of life. Whereas the previous two chapters concentrated
on static electricity and the fundamental force underlying its behavior, the next few chapters will be devoted to
electric and magnetic phenomena involving current. In addition to exploring applications of electricity, we shall gain
new insights into nature—in particular, the fact that all magnetism results from electric current.

The flicker of numbers on a handheld

Click to view content (https://openstax.org/books/college-physics-2e/pages/20-introduction-to-electric-current-
resistance-and-ohms-law)

858

20 • Electric Current, Resistance, and Ohm's Law

20.1 Current

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

• Define electric current, ampere, and drift velocity
• Describe the direction of charge flow in conventional current.
• Use drift velocity to calculate current and vice versa.

Electric Current

Electric current is defined to be the rate at which charge flows. A large current, such as that used to start a truck
engine, moves a large amount of charge in a small time, whereas a small current, such as that used to operate a
hand-held calculator, moves a small amount of charge over a long period of time. In equation form, electric current

is defined to be

is the amount of charge passing through a given area in time

where
often taken to be zero, in which case
the French physicist André-Marie Ampère (1775–1836). Since
per second:

.) (See Figure 20.2.) The SI unit for current is the ampere (A), named for
, we see that an ampere is one coulomb

20.1

. (As in previous chapters, initial time is

Not only are fuses and circuit breakers rated in amperes (or amps), so are many electrical appliances.

20.2

FIGURE 20.2 The rate of flow of charge is current. An ampere is the flow of one coulomb through an area in one second.

EXAMPLE 20.1

Calculating Currents: Current in a Truck Battery and a Handheld Calculator
(a) What is the current involved when a truck battery sets in motion 720 C of charge in 4.00 s while starting an
engine? (b) How long does it take 1.00 C of charge to flow through a handheld calculator if a 0.300-mA current is
flowing?

Strategy

We can use the definition of current in the equation
are given. In part (b), we rearrange the definition of current and use the given values of charge and current to find
the time required.

to find the current in part (a), since charge and time

Solution for (a)

Entering the given values for charge and time into the definition of current gives

20.3

Access for free at openstax.org

20.1 • Current

859

Discussion for (a)

This large value for current illustrates the fact that a large charge is moved in a small amount of time. The currents in
these “starter motors” are fairly large because large frictional forces need to be overcome when setting something
in motion.

Solution for (b)

Solving the relationship

for time

, and entering the known values for charge and current gives

×

×

20.4

Discussion for (b)

This time is slightly less than an hour. The small current used by the hand-held calculator takes a much longer time
to move a smaller charge than the large current of the truck starter. So why can we operate our calculators only
seconds after turning them on? It’s because calculators require very little energy. Such small current and energy
demands allow handheld calculators to operate from solar cells or to get many hours of use out of small batteries.
Remember, calculators do not have moving parts in the same way that a truck engine has with cylinders and pistons,
so the technology requires smaller currents.

Figure 20.3 shows a simple circuit and the standard schematic representation of a battery, conducting path, and
load (a resistor). Schematics are very useful in visualizing the main features of a circuit. A single schematic can
represent a wide variety of situations. The schematic in Figure 20.3 (b), for example, can represent anything from a
truck battery connected to a headlight lighting the street in front of the truck to a small battery connected to a
penlight lighting a keyhole in a door. Such schematics are useful because the analysis is the same for a wide variety
of situations. We need to understand a few schematics to apply the concepts and analysis to many more situations.

FIGURE 20.3 (a) A simple electric circuit. A closed path for current to flow through is supplied by conducting wires connecting a load to the
terminals of a battery. (b) In this schematic, the battery is represented by the two parallel red lines, conducting wires are shown as straight
lines, and the zigzag represents the load. The schematic represents a wide variety of similar circuits.

Note that the direction of current flow in Figure 20.3 is from positive to negative. The direction of conventional
current is the direction that positive charge would flow. Depending on the situation, positive charges, negative

860

20 • Electric Current, Resistance, and Ohm's Law

charges, or both may move. In metal wires, for example, current is carried by electrons—that is, negative charges
move. In ionic solutions, such as salt water, both positive and negative charges move. This is also true in nerve cells.
A Van de Graaff generator used for nuclear research can produce a current of pure positive charges, such as protons.
Figure 20.4 illustrates the movement of charged particles that compose a current. The fact that conventional current
is taken to be in the direction that positive charge would flow can be traced back to American politician and scientist
Benjamin Franklin in the 1700s. He named the type of charge associated with electrons negative, long before they
were known to carry current in so many situations. Franklin, in fact, was totally unaware of the small-scale structure
of electricity.

It is important to realize that there is an electric field in conductors responsible for producing the current, as
illustrated in Figure 20.4. Unlike static electricity, where a conductor in equilibrium cannot have an electric field in it,
conductors carrying a current have an electric field and are not in static equilibrium. An electric field is needed to
supply energy to move the charges.

Making Connections: Take-Home Investigation—Electric Current Illustration

Find a straw and little peas that can move freely in the straw. Place the straw flat on a table and fill the straw
with peas. When you pop one pea in at one end, a different pea should pop out the other end. This
demonstration is an analogy for an electric current. Identify what compares to the electrons and what compares
to the supply of energy. What other analogies can you find for an electric current?

Note that the flow of peas is based on the peas physically bumping into each other; electrons flow due to
mutually repulsive electrostatic forces.

is the rate at which charge moves through an area

FIGURE 20.4 Current
defined to move in the direction of the electric field. (a) Positive charges move in the direction of the electric field and the same direction as
conventional current. (b) Negative charges move in the direction opposite to the electric field. Conventional current is in the direction
opposite to the movement of negative charge. The flow of electrons is sometimes referred to as electronic flow.

, such as the cross-section of a wire. Conventional current is

EXAMPLE 20.2

Calculating the Number of Electrons that Move through a Calculator
If the 0.300-mA current through the calculator mentioned in the Example 20.1 example is carried by electrons, how
many electrons per second pass through it?

Strategy

The current calculated in the previous example was defined for the flow of positive charge. For electrons, the
magnitude is the same, but the sign is opposite,

.Since each electron

has a

Access for free at openstax.org

charge of

Solution

, we can convert the current in coulombs per second to electrons per second.

Starting with the definition of current, we have

20.1 • Current

861

We divide this by the charge per electron, so that

×

×

×

×

20.5

20.6

Discussion

There are so many charged particles moving, even in small currents, that individual charges are not noticed, just as
individual water molecules are not noticed in water flow. Even more amazing is that they do not always keep moving
forward like soldiers in a parade. Rather they are like a crowd of people with movement in different directions but a
general trend to move forward. There are lots of collisions with atoms in the metal wire and, of course, with other
electrons.

Drift Velocity

Electrical signals are known to move very rapidly. Telephone conversations carried by currents in wires cover large
distances without noticeable delays. Lights come on as soon as a switch is flicked. Most electrical signals carried by
currents travel at speeds on the order of
individual charges that make up the current move muchmore slowly on average, typically drifting at speeds on the
order of

. How do we reconcile these two speeds, and what does it tell us about standard conductors?

, a significant fraction of the speed of light. Interestingly, the

The high speed of electrical signals results from the fact that the force between charges acts rapidly at a distance.
Thus, when a free charge is forced into a wire, as in Figure 20.5, the incoming charge pushes other charges ahead of
it, which in turn push on charges farther down the line. The density of charge in a system cannot easily be increased,
and so the signal is passed on rapidly. The resulting electrical shock wave moves through the system at nearly the
speed of light. To be precise, this rapidly moving signal or shock wave is a rapidly propagating change in electric
field.

FIGURE 20.5 When charged particles are forced into this volume of a conductor, an equal number are quickly forced to leave. The repulsion
between like charges makes it difficult to increase the number of charges in a volume. Thus, as one charge enters, another leaves almost
immediately, carrying the signal rapidly forward.

Good conductors have large numbers of free charges in them. In metals, the free charges are free electrons. Figure
20.6 shows how free electrons move through an ordinary conductor. The distance that an individual electron can
move between collisions with atoms or other electrons is quite small. The electron paths thus appear nearly
random, like the motion of atoms in a gas. But there is an electric field in the conductor that causes the electrons to
drift in the direction shown (opposite to the field, since they are negative). The drift velocity
velocity of the free charges. Drift velocity is quite small, since there are so many free charges. If we have an estimate
of the density of free electrons in a conductor, we can calculate the drift velocity for a given current. The larger the
density, the lower the velocity required for a given current.

is the average

862

20 • Electric Current, Resistance, and Ohm's Law

FIGURE 20.6 Free electrons moving in a conductor make many collisions with other electrons and atoms. The path of one electron is
, and it is in the direction opposite to the electric field for
shown. The average velocity of the free charges is called the drift velocity,
electrons. The collisions normally transfer energy to the conductor, requiring a constant supply of energy to maintain a steady current.

Conduction of Electricity and Heat

Good electrical conductors are often good heat conductors, too. This is because large numbers of free electrons
can carry electrical current and can transport thermal energy.

The free-electron collisions transfer energy to the atoms of the conductor. The electric field does work in moving the
electrons through a distance, but that work does not increase the kinetic energy (nor speed, therefore) of the
electrons. The work is transferred to the conductor’s atoms, possibly increasing temperature. Thus a continuous
power input is required to keep a current flowing. An exception, of course, is found in superconductors, for reasons
we shall explore in a later chapter. Superconductors can have a steady current without a continual supply of
energy—a great energy savings. In contrast, the supply of energy can be useful, such as in a lightbulb filament. The
supply of energy is necessary to increase the temperature of the tungsten filament, so that the filament glows.

Making Connections: Take-Home Investigation—Filament Observations

Find a lightbulb with a filament. Look carefully at the filament and describe its structure. To what points is the
filament connected?

We can obtain an expression for the relationship between current and drift velocity by considering the number of
free charges in a segment of wire, as illustrated in Figure 20.7. The number of free charges per unit volumeis given
the symbol and depends on the material. The shaded segment has a volume
charges in it is
(Recall that for electrons,
charges move out of this segment in time

.) Current is charge moved per unit time; thus, if all the original

, where is the amount of charge on each carrier.

, so that the number of free

in this segment is thus

, the current is

. The charge

is

Note that
Rearranging terms gives

is the magnitude of the drift velocity,

, since the charges move an average distance

in a time

.

20.8

where is the current through a wire of cross-sectional area made of a material with a free charge density . The
carriers of the current each have charge and move with a drift velocity of magnitude

.

20.7

Access for free at openstax.org

20.1 • Current

863

FIGURE 20.7 All the charges in the shaded volume of this wire move out in a time , having a drift velocity of magnitude
for further discussion.

. See text

Note that simple drift velocity is not the entire story. The speed of an electron is much greater than its drift velocity.
In addition, not all of the electrons in a conductor can move freely, and those that do might move somewhat faster
or slower than the drift velocity. So what do we mean by free electrons? Atoms in a metallic conductor are packed in
the form of a lattice structure. Some electrons are far enough away from the atomic nuclei that they do not
experience the attraction of the nuclei as much as the inner electrons do. These are the free electrons. They are not
bound to a single atom but can instead move freely among the atoms in a “sea” of electrons. These free electrons
respond by accelerating when an electric field is applied. Of course as they move they collide with the atoms in the
lattice and other electrons, generating thermal energy, and the conductor gets warmer. In an insulator, the
organization of the atoms and the structure do not allow for such free electrons.

EXAMPLE 20.3

Calculating Drift Velocity in a Common Wire
Calculate the drift velocity of electrons in a 12-gauge copper wire (which has a diameter of 2.053 mm) carrying a
20.0-A current, given that there is one free electron per copper atom. (Household wiring often contains 12-gauge
copper wire, and the maximum current allowed in such wire is usually 20 A.) The density of copper is

.

Strategy

We can calculate the drift velocity using the equation

. The current

is given, and

is the charge of an electron. We can calculate the area of a cross-section of the wire using the

formula

where is one-half the given diameter, 2.053 mm. We are given the density of copper,

and the periodic table shows that the atomic mass of copper is 63.54 g/mol. We can use these

two quantities along with Avogadro’s number,
per cubic meter.

Solution

to determine

the number of free electrons

First, calculate the density of free electrons in copper. There is one free electron per copper atom. Therefore, is the
same as the number of copper atoms per

. We can now find as follows:

The cross-sectional area of the wire is

Rearranging

to isolate drift velocity gives

20.9

20.10

864

20 • Electric Current, Resistance, and Ohm's Law

Discussion

20.11

The minus sign indicates that the negative charges are moving in the direction opposite to conventional current. The
small value for drift velocity (on the order of
faster (about

) confirms that the signal moves on the order of

) than the charges that carry it.

times

20.2 Ohm’s Law: Resistance and Simple Circuits

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

• Explain the origin of Ohm’s law.
• Calculate voltages, currents, or resistances with Ohm’s law.
• Explain what an ohmic material is.
• Describe a simple circuit.

What drives current? We can think of various devices—such as batteries, generators, wall outlets, and so on—which
are necessary to maintain a current. All such devices create a potential difference and are loosely referred to as
voltage sources. When a voltage source is connected to a conductor, it applies a potential difference
an electric field. The electric field in turn exerts force on charges, causing current.

that creates

Ohm’s Law

The current that flows through most substances is directly proportional to the voltage
physicist Georg Simon Ohm (1787–1854) was the first to demonstrate experimentally that the current in a metal
wire is directly proportional to the voltage applied:

applied to it. The German

20.12

This important relationship is known as Ohm’s law. It can be viewed as a cause-and-effect relationship, with
voltage the cause and current the effect. This is an empirical law like that for friction—an experimentally observed
phenomenon. Such a linear relationship doesn’t always occur.

Resistance and Simple Circuits

If voltage drives current, what impedes it? The electric property that impedes current (crudely similar to friction and
air resistance) is called resistance . Collisions of moving charges with atoms and molecules in a substance
transfer energy to the substance and limit current. Resistance is defined as inversely proportional to current, or

20.13

Thus, for example, current is cut in half if resistance doubles. Combining the relationships of current to voltage and
current to resistance gives

20.14

This relationship is also called Ohm’s law. Ohm’s law in this form really defines resistance for certain materials.
Ohm’s law (like Hooke’s law) is not universally valid. The many substances for which Ohm’s law holds are called
ohmic. These include good conductors like copper and aluminum, and some poor conductors under certain
circumstances. Ohmic materials have a resistance
has simple resistance is called a resistor, even if its resistance is small. The unit for resistance is an ohm and is given
the symbol
ohm = 1 volt per ampere:

(upper case Greek omega). Rearranging

, and so the units of resistance are 1

that is independent of voltage

. An object that

and current

gives

Access for free at openstax.org

20.2 • Ohm’s Law: Resistance and Simple Circuits

865

20.15

Figure 20.8 shows the schematic for a simple circuit. A simple circuit has a single voltage source and a single
resistor. The wires connecting the voltage source to the resistor can be assumed to have negligible resistance, or
their resistance can be included in .

FIGURE 20.8 A simple electric circuit in which a closed path for current to flow is supplied by conductors (usually metal wires) connecting a
load to the terminals of a battery, represented by the red parallel lines. The zigzag symbol represents the single resistor and includes any
resistance in the connections to the voltage source.

EXAMPLE 20.4

Calculating Resistance: An Automobile Headlight
What is the resistance of an automobile headlight through which 2.50 A flows when 12.0 V is applied to it?

Strategy

We can rearrange Ohm’s law as stated by

and use it to find the resistance.

Solution

Rearranging

and substituting known values gives

Discussion

This is a relatively small resistance, but it is larger than the cold resistance of the headlight. As we shall see in
Resistance and Resistivity, resistance usually increases with temperature, and so the bulb has a lower resistance
when it is first switched on and will draw considerably more current during its brief warm-up period.

20.16

Resistances range over many orders of magnitude. Some ceramic insulators, such as those used to support power
lines, have resistances of
, whereas the
resistance of the human heart is about
resistance of
the shape of an object and the material of which it is composed, as will be seen in Resistance and Resistivity.

, and superconductors have no resistance at all (they are non-ohmic). Resistance is related to

. A meter-long piece of large-diameter copper wire may have a

or more. A dry person may have a hand-to-foot resistance of

Additional insight is gained by solving

for

yielding

dropis often used for this voltage. For instance, the headlight in Example 20.4 has an

can be interpreted as the voltage drop across a resistor produced by the flow of current . The
This expression for
phrase
drop of 12.0 V.
If voltage is measured at various points in a circuit, it will be seen to increase at the voltage source and decrease at
the resistor. Voltage is similar to fluid pressure. The voltage source is like a pump, creating a pressure difference,
causing current—the flow of charge. The resistor is like a pipe that reduces pressure and limits flow because of its
resistance. Conservation of energy has important consequences here. The voltage source supplies energy (causing
an electric field and a current), and the resistor converts it to another form (such as thermal energy). In a simple
circuit (one with a single simple resistor), the voltage supplied by the source equals the voltage drop across the

20.17

866

20 • Electric Current, Resistance, and Ohm's Law

resistor, since
the energy converted by the resistor are equal. (See Figure 20.9.)

, and the same flows through each. Thus the energy supplied by the voltage source and

FIGURE 20.9 The voltage drop across a resistor in a simple circuit equals the voltage output of the battery.

PHET EXPLORATIONS

Making Connections: Conservation of Energy
In a simple electrical circuit, the sole resistor converts energy supplied by the source into another form.
Conservation of energy is evidenced here by the fact that all of the energy supplied by the source is converted to
another form by the resistor alone. We will find that conservation of energy has other important applications in
circuits and is a powerful tool in circuit analysis.

PHET EXPLORATIONS

Ohm's Law
See how the equation form of Ohm's law relates to a simple circuit. Adjust the voltage and resistance, and see the
current change according to Ohm's law. The sizes of the symbols in the equation change to match the circuit
diagram.

Click to view content (https://openstax.org/books/college-physics-2e/pages/20-2-ohms-law-resistance-and-
simple-circuits)

20.3 Resistance and Resistivity

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

• Explain the concept of resistivity.
• Use resistivity to calculate the resistance of specified configurations of material.
• Use the thermal coefficient of resistivity to calculate the change of resistance with temperature.

Material and Shape Dependence of Resistance

The resistance of an object depends on its shape and the material of which it is composed. The cylindrical resistor in
Figure 20.10 is easy to analyze, and, by so doing, we can gain insight into the resistance of more complicated
is directly proportional to its length , similar to
shapes. As you might expect, the cylinder’s electric resistance
the resistance of a pipe to fluid flow. The longer the cylinder, the more collisions charges will make with its atoms.
The greater the diameter of the cylinder, the more current it can carry (again similar to the flow of fluid through a
pipe). In fact,

is inversely proportional to the cylinder’s cross-sectional area

.

Access for free at openstax.org

20.3 • Resistance and Resistivity

867

FIGURE 20.10 A uniform cylinder of length
posed by a pipe to fluid flow. The longer the cylinder, the greater its resistance. The larger its cross-sectional area
resistance.

and cross-sectional area

. Its resistance to the flow of current is similar to the resistance

, the smaller its

For a given shape, the resistance depends on the material of which the object is composed. Different materials offer
different resistance to the flow of charge. We define the resistivity of a substance so that the resistance
object is directly proportional to . Resistivity
size. The resistance
resistivity , is

is an intrinsicproperty of a material, independent of its shape or

of a uniform cylinder of length , of cross-sectional area

, and made of a material with

of an

20.18

. The materials listed in the table are separated into categories of

Table 20.1 gives representative values of
conductors, semiconductors, and insulators, based on broad groupings of resistivities. Conductors have the smallest
resistivities, and insulators have the largest; semiconductors have intermediate resistivities. Conductors have
varying but large free charge densities, whereas most charges in insulators are bound to atoms and are not free to
move. Semiconductors are intermediate, having far fewer free charges than conductors, but having properties that
make the number of free charges depend strongly on the type and amount of impurities in the semiconductor. These
unique properties of semiconductors are put to use in modern electronics, as will be explored in later chapters.

Material

Resistivity

(

)

Conductors

Silver

Copper

Gold

Aluminum

Tungsten

Iron

Platinum

Steel

Lead

Manganin (Cu, Mn, Ni alloy)

TABLE 20.1 Resistivities of Various materials at

868

20 • Electric Current, Resistance, and Ohm's Law

Material

Resistivity

(

)

Constantan (Cu, Ni alloy)

Mercury

Nichrome (Ni, Fe, Cr alloy)

Semiconductors1

Carbon (pure)

Carbon

Germanium (pure)

Germanium

Silicon (pure)

Silicon

Insulators

Amber

Glass

Lucite

Mica

Quartz (fused)

Rubber (hard)

Sulfur

Teflon

Wood

TABLE 20.1 Resistivities of Various materials at

EXAMPLE 20.5

Calculating Resistor Diameter: A Headlight Filament
A car headlight filament is made of tungsten and has a cold resistance of

. If the filament is a cylinder 4.00

1 Values depend strongly on amounts and types of impurities

Access for free at openstax.org

20.3 • Resistance and Resistivity

869

cm long (it may be coiled to save space), what is its diameter?

Strategy

We can rearrange the equation

to find the cross-sectional area

of the filament from the given

information. Then its diameter can be found by assuming it has a circular cross-section.

Solution

The cross-sectional area, found by rearranging the expression for the resistance of a cylinder given in

, is

Substituting the given values, and taking from Table 20.1, yields

×

×

×

The area of a circle is related to its diameter

by

Solving for the diameter

, and substituting the value found for

, gives

×

×

20.19

20.20

20.21

20.22

Discussion

The diameter is just under a tenth of a millimeter. It is quoted to only two digits, because is known to only two
digits.

Temperature Variation of Resistance

The resistivity of all materials depends on temperature. Some even become superconductors (zero resistivity) at
very low temperatures. (See Figure 20.11.) Conversely, the resistivity of conductors increases with increasing
temperature. Since the atoms vibrate more rapidly and over larger distances at higher temperatures, the electrons
moving through a metal make more collisions, effectively making the resistivity higher. Over relatively small
temperature changes (about
following equation

varies with temperature change

as expressed in the

or less), resistivity

where
is the original resistivity and is the temperature coefficient of resistivity. (See the values of
20.2 below.) For larger temperature changes, may vary or a nonlinear equation may be needed to find . Note that

in Table

is positive for metals, meaning their resistivity increases with temperature. Some alloys have been developed
specifically to have a small temperature dependence. Manganin (which is made of copper, manganese and nickel),
for example, has
close to zero (to three digits on the scale in Table 20.2), and so its resistivity varies only slightly
with temperature. This is useful for making a temperature-independent resistance standard, for example.

20.23

870

20 • Electric Current, Resistance, and Ohm's Law

FIGURE 20.11 The resistance of a sample of mercury is zero at very low temperatures—it is a superconductor up to about 4.2 K. Above that
critical temperature, its resistance makes a sudden jump and then increases nearly linearly with temperature.

Material

Coefficient

(1/°C)2

Conductors

Silver

Copper

Gold

Aluminum

Tungsten

Iron

Platinum

Lead

Manganin (Cu, Mn, Ni alloy)

Constantan (Cu, Ni alloy)

Mercury

Nichrome (Ni, Fe, Cr alloy)

Semiconductors

Carbon (pure)

TABLE 20.2 Tempature Coefficients of Resistivity

2 Values at 20°C.

Access for free at openstax.org

20.3 • Resistance and Resistivity

871

Material

Coefficient

(1/°C)2

Germanium (pure)

Silicon (pure)

TABLE 20.2 Tempature Coefficients of Resistivity

is negative for the semiconductors listed in Table 20.2, meaning that their resistivity decreases with

Note also that
increasing temperature. They become better conductors at higher temperature, because increased thermal
agitation increases the number of free charges available to carry current. This property of decreasing with
temperature is also related to the type and amount of impurities present in the semiconductors.

, and so, if

The resistance of an object also depends on temperature, since
know
and
dependence as . (Examination of the coefficients of linear expansion shows them to be about two orders of
magnitude less than typical temperature coefficients of resistivity, and so the effect of temperature on
and
about two orders of magnitude less than on .) Thus,

do not change greatly with temperature, will have the same temperature

is directly proportional to . For a cylinder we

is

20.24

is the temperature dependence of the resistance of an object, where
. Numerous thermometers are based on the effect of temperature on
resistance after a temperature change
resistance. (See Figure 20.12.) One of the most common is the thermistor, a semiconductor crystal with a strong
temperature dependence, the resistance of which is measured to obtain its temperature. The device is small, so that
it quickly comes into thermal equilibrium with the part of a person it touches.

is the original resistance and

is the

FIGURE 20.12 These familiar thermometers are based on the automated measurement of a thermistor’s temperature-dependent
resistance. (credit: Biol, Wikimedia Commons)

EXAMPLE 20.6

Calculating Resistance: Hot-Filament Resistance
Although caution must be used in applying
greater than
then, is the resistance of the tungsten filament in the previous example if its temperature is increased from room
temperature (

for temperature changes
, for tungsten the equations work reasonably well for very large temperature changes. What,

) to a typical operating temperature of

and

?

Strategy

This is a straightforward application of
be

, and the temperature change is

, since the original resistance of the filament was given to

.

Solution

The hot resistance

is obtained by entering known values into the above equation:

×

20.25

872

20 • Electric Current, Resistance, and Ohm's Law

Discussion

This value is consistent with the headlight resistance example in Ohm’s Law: Resistance and Simple Circuits.

PHET EXPLORATIONS

Resistance in a Wire
Learn about the physics of resistance in a wire. Change its resistivity, length, and area to see how they affect the
wire's resistance. The sizes of the symbols in the equation change along with the diagram of a wire.

Click to view content (https://openstax.org/books/college-physics-2e/pages/20-3-resistance-and-resistivity)

20.4 Electric Power and Energy

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

• Calculate the power dissipated by a resistor and power supplied by a power supply.
• Calculate the cost of electricity under various circumstances.

Power in Electric Circuits

Power is associated by many people with electricity. Knowing that power is the rate of energy use or energy
conversion, what is the expression for electric power? Power transmission lines might come to mind. We also think
of lightbulbs in terms of their power ratings in watts. Let us compare a 25-W bulb with a 60-W bulb. (See Figure
20.13(a).) Since both operate on the same voltage, the 60-W bulb must draw more current to have a greater power
rating. Thus the 60-W bulb’s resistance must be lower than that of a 25-W bulb. If we increase voltage, we also
increase power. For example, when a 25-W bulb that is designed to operate on 120 V is connected to 240 V, it
briefly glows very brightly and then burns out. Precisely how are voltage, current, and resistance related to electric
power?

FIGURE 20.13 (a) Which of these lightbulbs, the 25-W bulb (upper left) or the 60-W bulb (upper right), has the higher resistance? Which
draws more current? Which uses the most energy? Can you tell from the color that the 25-W filament is cooler? Is the brighter bulb a
different color and if so why? (credits: Dickbauch, Wikimedia Commons; Greg Westfall, Flickr) (b) This compact fluorescent light (CFL) puts
out the same intensity of light as the 60-W bulb, but at 1/4 to 1/10 the input power. (credit: dbgg1979, Flickr)

Electric energy depends on both the voltage involved and the charge moved. This is expressed most simply as

Access for free at openstax.org

, where is the charge moved and

is the voltage (or more precisely, the potential difference the charge

moves through). Power is the rate at which energy is moved, and so electric power is

20.4 • Electric Power and Energy

873

Recognizing that current is

(note that

here), the expression for power becomes

20.26

20.27

) is simply the product of current times voltage. Power has familiar units of watts. Since the SI unit

Electric power (
for potential energy (PE) is the joule, power has units of joules per second, or watts. Thus,
. For
example, cars often have one or more auxiliary power outlets with which you can charge a cell phone or other
electronic devices. These outlets may be rated at 20 A, so that the circuit can deliver a maximum power

. In some applications, electric power may be expressed as volt-amperes or even

kilovolt-amperes (

).

To see the relationship of power to resistance, we combine Ohm’s law with

. Substituting

gives

. Similarly, substituting

gives

. Three expressions for electric power

are listed together here for convenience:

20.28

20.29

20.30

Note that the first equation is always valid, whereas the other two can be used only for resistors. In a simple circuit,
with one voltage source and a single resistor, the power supplied by the voltage source and that dissipated by the
resistor are identical. (In more complicated circuits,
can be the power dissipated by a single device and not the
total power in the circuit.)

Different insights can be gained from the three different expressions for electric power. For example,
implies that the lower the resistance connected to a given voltage source, the greater the power delivered.
Furthermore, since voltage is squared in
expected. Thus, when the voltage is doubled to a 25-W bulb, its power nearly quadruples to about 100 W, burning it
out. If the bulb’s resistance remained constant, its power would be exactly 100 W, but at the higher temperature its
resistance is higher, too.

, the effect of applying a higher voltage is perhaps greater than

EXAMPLE 20.7

Calculating Power Dissipation and Current: Hot and Cold Power
(a) Consider the examples given in Ohm’s Law: Resistance and Simple Circuits and Resistance and Resistivity. Then
find the power dissipated by the car headlight in these examples, both when it is hot and when it is cold. (b) What
current does it draw when cold?

Strategy for (a)

For the hot headlight, we know voltage and current, so we can use
we know the voltage and resistance, so we can use

to find the power.

to find the power. For the cold headlight,

Solution for (a)

Entering the known values of current and voltage for the hot headlight, we obtain

The cold resistance was

, and so the power it uses when first switched on is

20.31

20.32

874

20 • Electric Current, Resistance, and Ohm's Law

Discussion for (a)

The 30 W dissipated by the hot headlight is typical. But the 411 W when cold is surprisingly higher. The initial power
quickly decreases as the bulb’s temperature increases and its resistance increases.

Strategy and Solution for (b)

The current when the bulb is cold can be found several different ways. We rearrange one of the power equations,

, and enter known values, obtaining

20.33

Discussion for (b)

The cold current is remarkably higher than the steady-state value of 2.50 A, but the current will quickly decline to
that value as the bulb’s temperature increases. Most fuses and circuit breakers (used to limit the current in a circuit)
are designed to tolerate very high currents briefly as a device comes on. In some cases, such as with electric
motors, the current remains high for several seconds, necessitating special “slow blow” fuses.

The Cost of Electricity

The more electric appliances you use and the longer they are left on, the higher your electric bill. This familiar fact is
based on the relationship between energy and power. You pay for the energy used. Since

, we see that

20.34

used; the longer they are on, the greater

is the energy used by a device using power
greater
consistent with the relationship
some idea of their power consumption rate in watts or kilowatts, the time they are on in hours, and the cost per
kilowatt-hour for your electric utility. Kilowatt-hours, like all other specialized energy units such as food calories, can

. It is easy to estimate the cost of operating electric appliances if you have

is. The energy unit on electric bills is the kilowatt-hour (

. For example, the more lightbulbs burning, the

for a time interval

),

be converted to joules. You can prove to yourself that

×

.

) used can be reduced either by reducing the time of use or by reducing the power

The electrical energy (
consumption of that appliance or fixture. This will not only reduce the cost, but it will also result in a reduced impact
on the environment. Improvements to lighting are some of the fastest ways to reduce the electrical energy used in a
home or business. About 20% of a home’s use of energy goes to lighting, while the number for commercial
establishments is closer to 40%. Fluorescent lights are about four times more efficient than incandescent
lights—this is true for both the long tubes and the compact fluorescent lights (CFL). (See Figure 20.13(b).) Thus, a
60-W incandescent bulb can be replaced by a 15-W CFL, which has the same brightness and color. CFLs have a bent
tube inside a globe or a spiral-shaped tube, all connected to a standard screw-in base that fits standard
incandescent light sockets. (Original problems with color, flicker, shape, and high initial investment for CFLs have
been addressed in recent years.) The heat transfer from these CFLs is less, and they last up to 10 times longer. The
significance of an investment in such bulbs is addressed in the next example. New white LED lights (which are
clusters of small LED bulbs) are even more efficient (twice that of CFLs) and last 5 times longer than CFLs. However,
their cost is still high.

Making Connections: Energy, Power, and Time

is one that you will find useful in many different contexts. The energy your body uses in

The relationship
exercise is related to the power level and duration of your activity, for example. The amount of heating by a
power source is related to the power level and time it is applied. Even the radiation dose of an X-ray image is
related to the power and time of exposure.

Access for free at openstax.org

20.5 • Alternating Current versus Direct Current

875

EXAMPLE 20.8

Calculating the Cost Effectiveness of Compact Fluorescent Lights (CFL)
If the cost of electricity in your area is 12 cents per kWh, what is the total cost (capital plus operation) of using a
60-W incandescent bulb for 1000 hours (the lifetime of that bulb) if the bulb cost 25 cents? (b) If we replace this
bulb with a compact fluorescent light that provides the same light output, but at one-quarter the wattage, and which
costs $1.50 but lasts 10 times longer (10,000 hours), what will that total cost be?

Strategy

To find the operating cost, we first find the energy used in kilowatt-hours and then multiply by the cost per kilowatt-
hour.

Solution for (a)

The energy used in kilowatt-hours is found by entering the power and time into the expression for energy:

In kilowatt-hours, this is

Now the electricity cost is

20.35

20.36

20.37

The total cost, including the cost of the bulb, will be $7.45 for 1000 hours (about one-half year at 5 hours per day).

Solution for (b)

Since the CFL uses only 15 W and not 60 W, the electricity cost will be $7.20/4 = $1.80. The CFL will last 10 times
longer than the incandescent, so that the investment cost will be 1/10 of the bulb cost for that time period of use, or
0.1($1.50) = $0.15. Therefore, the total cost will be $1.95 for 1000 hours.

Discussion

Therefore, it is much cheaper to use the CFLs, even though the initial investment is higher. The increased cost of
labor that a business must include for replacing the incandescent bulbs more often has not been figured in here.

Making Connections: Take-Home Experiment—Electrical Energy Use Inventory

1) Make a list of the power ratings on a range of appliances in your home or room. Explain why something like a
toaster has a higher rating than a digital clock. Estimate the energy consumed by these appliances in an average
day (by estimating their time of use). Some appliances might only state the operating current. If the household
voltage is 120 V, then use
building. (You might need to assume the long fluorescent lights in use are rated at 32 W.) Suppose that the
building was closed all weekend and that these lights were left on from 6 p.m. Friday until 8 a.m. Monday. What
would this oversight cost? How about for an entire year of weekends?

. 2) Check out the total wattage used in the rest rooms of your school’s floor or

20.5 Alternating Current versus Direct Current

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

• Explain the differences and similarities between AC and DC current.
• Calculate rms voltage, current, and average power.
• Explain why AC current is used for power transmission.

876

20 • Electric Current, Resistance, and Ohm's Law

Alternating Current

Most of the examples dealt with so far, and particularly those utilizing batteries, have constant voltage sources.
Once the current is established, it is thus also a constant. Direct current (DC) is the flow of electric charge in only
one direction. It is the steady state of a constant-voltage circuit. Most well-known applications, however, use a time-
varying voltage source. Alternating current (AC) is the flow of electric charge that periodically reverses direction. If
the source varies periodically, particularly sinusoidally, the circuit is known as an alternating current circuit.
Examples include the commercial and residential power that serves so many of our needs. Figure 20.14 shows
graphs of voltage and current versus time for typical DC and AC power. The AC voltages and frequencies commonly
used in homes and businesses vary around the world.

FIGURE 20.14 (a) DC voltage and current are constant in time, once the current is established. (b) A graph of voltage and current versus
time for 60-Hz AC power. The voltage and current are sinusoidal and are in phase for a simple resistance circuit. The frequencies and peak
voltages of AC sources differ greatly.

FIGURE 20.15 The potential difference
expression for

is given by

between the terminals of an AC voltage source fluctuates as shown. The mathematical

.

Figure 20.15 shows a schematic of a simple circuit with an AC voltage source. The voltage between the terminals
fluctuates as shown, with the AC voltage given by

where
circuit,

is the voltage at time ,

is the peak voltage, and

is the frequency in hertz. For this simple resistance

, and so the AC current is

20.39

where is the current at time , and
said to be in phase, as seen in Figure 20.14(b).

is the peak current. For this example, the voltage and current are

20.38

Access for free at openstax.org

20.5 • Alternating Current versus Direct Current

877

Current in the resistor alternates back and forth just like the driving voltage, since
. If the resistor is a
fluorescent light bulb, for example, it brightens and dims 120 times per second as the current repeatedly goes
through zero. A 120-Hz flicker is too rapid for your eyes to detect, but if you wave your hand back and forth between
your face and a fluorescent light, you will see a stroboscopic effect evidencing AC. The fact that the light output
fluctuates means that the power is fluctuating. The power supplied is
and
above, we see that the time dependence of power is

, as shown in Figure 20.16.

. Using the expressions for

Making Connections: Take-Home Experiment—AC/DC Lights

Wave your hand back and forth between your face and a fluorescent light bulb. Do you observe the same thing
with the headlights on your car? Explain what you observe. Warning: Do not look directly at very bright light.

FIGURE 20.16 AC power as a function of time. Since the voltage and current are in phase here, their product is non-negative and fluctuates
between zero and

. Average power is

.

We are most often concerned with average power rather than its fluctuations—that 60-W light bulb in your desk
lamp has an average power consumption of 60 W, for example. As illustrated in Figure 20.16, the average power

is

20.40

This is evident from the graph, since the areas above and below the
proven using trigonometric identities. Similarly, we define an average or rms current
voltage

to be, respectively,

line are equal, but it can also be

and average or rms

20.41

20.42

and

where rms stands for root mean square, a particular kind of average. In general, to obtain a root mean square, the
particular quantity is squared, its mean (or average) is found, and the square root is taken. This is useful for AC,
since the average value is zero. Now,

which gives

20.43

20.44

as stated above. It is standard practice to quote
most household electricity is 120 V AC, which means that
interrupt a sustained
You can think of these rms and average values as the equivalent DC values for a simple resistive circuit.

rather than the peak values. For example,
is 120 V. The common 10-A circuit breaker will

greater than 10 A. Your 1.0-kW microwave oven consumes

, and

, and so on.

,

878

20 • Electric Current, Resistance, and Ohm's Law

To summarize, when dealing with AC, Ohm’s law and the equations for power are completely analogous to those for
DC, but rms and average values are used for AC. Thus, for AC, Ohm’s law is written

The various expressions for AC power

are

and

EXAMPLE 20.9

20.45

20.46

20.47

20.48

Peak Voltage and Power for AC
(a) What is the value of the peak voltage for 120-V AC power? (b) What is the peak power consumption rate of a
60.0-W AC light bulb?

Strategy

We are told that

is 120 V and

is 60.0 W. We can use

to find the peak voltage, and we can

manipulate the definition of power to find the peak power from the given average power.

Solution for (a)

Solving the equation

for the peak voltage

and substituting the known value for

gives

Discussion for (a)

This means that the AC voltage swings from 170 V to
voltage is a constant 120 V.

and back 60 times every second. An equivalent DC

20.49

Solution for (b)

Peak power is peak current times peak voltage. Thus,

We know the average power is 60.0 W, and so

Discussion

20.50

20.51

So the power swings from zero to 120 W one hundred twenty times per second (twice each cycle), and the power
averages 60 W.

Why Use AC for Power Distribution?

Most large power-distribution systems are AC. Moreover, the power is transmitted at much higher voltages than the
120-V AC (240 V in most parts of the world) we use in homes and on the job. Economies of scale make it cheaper to
build a few very large electric power-generation plants than to build numerous small ones. This necessitates
sending power long distances, and it is obviously important that energy losses en route be minimized. High voltages

Access for free at openstax.org

can be transmitted with much smaller power losses than low voltages, as we shall see. (See Figure 20.17.) For
safety reasons, the voltage at the user is reduced to familiar values. The crucial factor is that it is much easier to
increase and decrease AC voltages than DC, so AC is used in most large power distribution systems.

20.5 • Alternating Current versus Direct Current

879

FIGURE 20.17 Power is distributed over large distances at high voltage to reduce power loss in the transmission lines. The voltages
generated at the power plant are stepped up by passive devices called transformers (see Transformers) to 330,000 volts (or more in some
places worldwide). At the point of use, the transformers reduce the voltage transmitted for safe residential and commercial use. (Credit:
GeorgHH, Wikimedia Commons)

EXAMPLE 20.10

Power Losses Are Less for High-Voltage Transmission
(a) What current is needed to transmit 100 MW of power at 200 kV? (b) What is the power dissipated by the
transmission lines if they have a resistance of
lines?

? (c) What percentage of the power is lost in the transmission

Strategy

We are given
we can find the current flowing (from
the ratio to the total power transmitted.

,

Solution

, and the resistance of the lines is

) and then the power dissipated in the lines (

. Using these givens,
), and we take

To find the current, we rearrange the relationship

and substitute known values. This gives

Solution

Knowing the current and given the resistance of the lines, the power dissipated in them is found from

. Substituting the known values gives

Solution

The percent loss is the ratio of this lost power to the total or input power, multiplied by 100:

Discussion

×

20.52

20.53

20.54

One-fourth of a percent is an acceptable loss. Note that if 100 MW of power had been transmitted at 25 kV, then a
current of 4000 A would have been needed. This would result in a power loss in the lines of 16.0 MW, or 16.0%
rather than 0.250%. The lower the voltage, the more current is needed, and the greater the power loss in the fixed-
resistance transmission lines. Of course, lower-resistance lines can be built, but this requires larger and more
expensive wires. If superconducting lines could be economically produced, there would be no loss in the

880

20 • Electric Current, Resistance, and Ohm's Law

transmission lines at all. But, as we shall see in a later chapter, there is a limit to current in superconductors, too. In
short, high voltages are more economical for transmitting power, and AC voltage is much easier to raise and lower,
so that AC is used in most large-scale power distribution systems.

It is widely recognized that high voltages pose greater hazards than low voltages. But, in fact, some high voltages,
such as those associated with common static electricity, can be harmless. So it is not voltage alone that determines
a hazard. It is not so widely recognized that AC shocks are often more harmful than similar DC shocks. Thomas
Edison thought that AC shocks were more harmful and set up a DC power-distribution system in New York City in the
late 1800s. There were bitter fights, in particular between Edison and George Westinghouse and Nikola Tesla, who
were advocating the use of AC in early power-distribution systems. AC has prevailed largely due to transformers and
lower power losses with high-voltage transmission.

PHET EXPLORATIONS

Generator
Generate electricity with a bar magnet! Discover the physics behind the phenomena by exploring magnets and how
you can use them to make a bulb light.

Click to view content (https://openstax.org/l/28gen).

20.6 Electric Hazards and the Human Body

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

• Define thermal hazard, shock hazard, and short circuit.
• Explain what effects various levels of current have on the human body.

There are two known hazards of electricity—thermal and shock. A thermal hazard is one where excessive electric
power causes undesired thermal effects, such as starting a fire in the wall of a house. A shock hazard occurs when
electric current passes through a person. Shocks range in severity from painful, but otherwise harmless, to heart-
stopping lethality. This section considers these hazards and the various factors affecting them in a quantitative
manner. Electrical Safety: Systems and Devices will consider systems and devices for preventing electrical hazards.

Thermal Hazards

Electric power causes undesired heating effects whenever electric energy is converted to thermal energy at a rate
faster than it can be safely dissipated. A classic example of this is the short circuit, a low-resistance path between
terminals of a voltage source. An example of a short circuit is shown in Figure 20.18. Insulation on wires leading to
an appliance has worn through, allowing the two wires to come into contact. Such an undesired contact with a high
voltage is called a short. Since the resistance of the short,
is 120 V and is

, is very small, the power dissipated in the short,

, then the power is 144 kW, muchgreater than

, is very large. For example, if

that used by a typical household appliance. Thermal energy delivered at this rate will very quickly raise the
temperature of surrounding materials, melting or perhaps igniting them.

Access for free at openstax.org

20.6 • Electric Hazards and the Human Body

881

FIGURE 20.18 A short circuit is an undesired low-resistance path across a voltage source. (a) Worn insulation on the wires of a toaster
allow them to come into contact with a low resistance . Since
(b) A schematic of the short circuit.

, thermal power is created so rapidly that the cord melts or burns.

One particularly insidious aspect of a short circuit is that its resistance may actually be decreased due to the
increase in temperature. This can happen if the short creates ionization. These charged atoms and molecules are
free to move and, thus, lower the resistance . Since
, the power dissipated in the short rises, possibly
causing more ionization, more power, and so on. High voltages, such as the 480-V AC used in some industrial
applications, lend themselves to this hazard, because higher voltages create higher initial power production in a
short.

Another serious, but less dramatic, thermal hazard occurs when wires supplying power to a user are overloaded
with too great a current. As discussed in the previous section, the power dissipated in the supply wires is

, where

is the resistance of the wires and the current flowing through them. If either or

is too

large, the wires overheat. For example, a worn appliance cord (with some of its braided wires broken) may have

rather than the

it should be. If 10.0 A of current passes through the cord, then

is dissipated in the cord—much more than is safe. Similarly, if a wire with a

resistance is meant to carry a few amps, but is instead carrying 100 A, it will severely overheat. The power
dissipated in the wire will in that case be
currents. (See Figure 20.19 and Figure 20.20.) Each device opens the circuit automatically when a sustained current
exceeds safe limits.

. Fuses and circuit breakers are used to limit excessive

882

20 • Electric Current, Resistance, and Ohm's Law

FIGURE 20.19 (a) A fuse has a metal strip with a low melting point that, when overheated by an excessive current, permanently breaks the
connection of a circuit to a voltage source. (b) A circuit breaker is an automatic but restorable electric switch. The one shown here has a
bimetallic strip that bends to the right and into the notch if overheated. The spring then forces the metal strip downward, breaking the
electrical connection at the points.

FIGURE 20.20 Schematic of a circuit with a fuse or circuit breaker in it. Fuses and circuit breakers act like automatic switches that open
when sustained current exceeds desired limits.

Fuses and circuit breakers for typical household voltages and currents are relatively simple to produce, but those for
large voltages and currents experience special problems. For example, when a circuit breaker tries to interrupt the
flow of high-voltage electricity, a spark can jump across its points that ionizes the air in the gap and allows the
current to continue flowing. Large circuit breakers found in power-distribution systems employ insulating gas and
even use jets of gas to blow out such sparks. Here AC is safer than DC, since AC current goes through zero 120 times
per second, giving a quick opportunity to extinguish these arcs.

Shock Hazards

Electrical currents through people produce tremendously varied effects. An electrical current can be used to block
back pain. The possibility of using electrical current to stimulate muscle action in paralyzed limbs, perhaps allowing
paraplegics to walk, is under study. TV dramatizations in which electrical shocks are used to bring a heart attack
victim out of ventricular fibrillation (a massively irregular, often fatal, beating of the heart) are more than common.
Yet most electrical shock fatalities occur because a current put the heart into fibrillation. A pacemaker uses
electrical shocks to stimulate the heart to beat properly. Some fatal shocks do not produce burns, but warts can be

Access for free at openstax.org

20.6 • Electric Hazards and the Human Body

883

safely burned off with electric current (though freezing using liquid nitrogen is now more common). Of course, there
are consistent explanations for these disparate effects. The major factors upon which the effects of electrical shock
depend are

1. The amount of current
2. The path taken by the current
3. The duration of the shock
4. The frequency

of the current (

for DC)

Table 20.3 gives the effects of electrical shocks as a function of current for a typical accidental shock. The effects
are for a shock that passes through the trunk of the body, has a duration of 1 s, and is caused by 60-Hz power.

FIGURE 20.21 An electric current can cause muscular contractions with varying effects. (a) The victim is “thrown” backward by involuntary
muscle contractions that extend the legs and torso. (b) The victim can’t let go of the wire that is stimulating all the muscles in the hand.
Those that close the fingers are stronger than those that open them.

Current
(mA)

1

5

Threshold of sensation

Maximum harmless current

Effect

10–20

Onset of sustained muscular contraction; cannot let go for duration of shock; contraction of chest
muscles may stop breathing during shock

50

Onset of pain

100–300+

Ventricular fibrillation possible; often fatal

300

Onset of burns depending on concentration of current

6000 (6 A)

Onset of sustained ventricular contraction and respiratory paralysis; both cease when shock ends;
heartbeat may return to normal; used to defibrillate the heart

TABLE 20.3 Effects of Electrical Shock as a Function of Current3

Our bodies are relatively good conductors due to the water in our bodies. Given that larger currents will flow through
sections with lower resistance (to be further discussed in the next chapter), electric currents preferentially flow
through paths in the human body that have a minimum resistance in a direct path to earth. The earth is a natural
electron sink. Wearing insulating shoes, a requirement in many professions, prohibits a pathway for electrons by
providing a large resistance in that path. Whenever working with high-power tools (drills), or in risky situations,
ensure that you do not provide a pathway for current flow (especially through the heart).

3 For an average male shocked through trunk of body for 1 s by 60-Hz AC. Values for females are 60–80% of those listed.

884

20 • Electric Current, Resistance, and Ohm's Law

Very small currents pass harmlessly and unfelt through the body. This happens to you regularly without your
knowledge. The threshold of sensation is only 1 mA and, although unpleasant, shocks are apparently harmless for
currents less than 5 mA. A great number of safety rules take the 5-mA value for the maximum allowed shock. At 10
to 20 mA and above, the current can stimulate sustained muscular contractions much as regular nerve impulses do.
People sometimes say they were knocked across the room by a shock, but what really happened was that certain
muscles contracted, propelling them in a manner not of their own choosing. (See Figure 20.21(a).) More frightening,
and potentially more dangerous, is the “can’t let go” effect illustrated in Figure 20.21(b). The muscles that close the
fingers are stronger than those that open them, so the hand closes involuntarily on the wire shocking it. This can
prolong the shock indefinitely. It can also be a danger to a person trying to rescue the victim, because the rescuer’s
hand may close about the victim’s wrist. Usually the best way to help the victim is to give the fist a hard knock/blow/
jar with an insulator or to throw an insulator at the fist. Modern electric fences, used in animal enclosures, are now
pulsed on and off to allow people who touch them to get free, rendering them less lethal than in the past.

Greater currents may affect the heart. Its electrical patterns can be disrupted, so that it beats irregularly and
ineffectively in a condition called “ventricular fibrillation.” This condition often lingers after the shock and is fatal
due to a lack of blood circulation. The threshold for ventricular fibrillation is between 100 and 300 mA. At about 300
mA and above, the shock can cause burns, depending on the concentration of current—the more concentrated, the
greater the likelihood of burns.

Very large currents cause the heart and diaphragm to contract for the duration of the shock. Both the heart and
breathing stop. Interestingly, both often return to normal following the shock. The electrical patterns on the heart
are completely erased in a manner that the heart can start afresh with normal beating, as opposed to the permanent
disruption caused by smaller currents that can put the heart into ventricular fibrillation. The latter is something like
scribbling on a blackboard, whereas the former completely erases it. TV dramatizations of electric shock used to
bring a heart attack victim out of ventricular fibrillation also show large paddles. These are used to spread out
current passed through the victim to reduce the likelihood of burns.

Current is the major factor determining shock severity (given that other conditions such as path, duration, and
frequency are fixed, such as in the table and preceding discussion). A larger voltage is more hazardous, but since
, the severity of the shock depends on the combination of voltage and resistance. For example, a person

with dry skin has a resistance of about

. If he comes into contact with 120-V AC, a current
passes harmlessly through him. The same person soaking wet may have a

resistance of
potentially dangerous.

and the same 120 V will produce a current of 12 mA—above the “can’t let go” threshold and

Most of the body’s resistance is in its dry skin. When wet, salts go into ion form, lowering the resistance significantly.
The interior of the body has a much lower resistance than dry skin because of all the ionic solutions and fluids it
contains. If skin resistance is bypassed, such as by an intravenous infusion, a catheter, or exposed pacemaker leads,
a person is rendered microshock sensitive. In this condition, currents about 1/1000 those listed in Table 20.3
produce similar effects. During open-heart surgery, currents as small as
Stringent electrical safety requirements in hospitals, particularly in surgery and intensive care, are related to the
doubly disadvantaged microshock-sensitive patient. The break in the skin has reduced his resistance, and so the
same voltage causes a greater current, and a much smaller current has a greater effect.

can be used to still the heart.

Access for free at openstax.org

20.7 • Nerve Conduction–Electrocardiograms

885

FIGURE 20.22 Graph of average values for the threshold of sensation and the “can’t let go” current as a function of frequency. The lower
the value, the more sensitive the body is at that frequency.

Factors other than current that affect the severity of a shock are its path, duration, and AC frequency. Path has
obvious consequences. For example, the heart is unaffected by an electric shock through the brain, such as may be
used to treat manic depression. And it is a general truth that the longer the duration of a shock, the greater its
effects. Figure 20.22 presents a graph that illustrates the effects of frequency on a shock. The curves show the
minimum current for two different effects, as a function of frequency. The lower the current needed, the more
sensitive the body is at that frequency. Ironically, the body is most sensitive to frequencies near the 50- or 60-Hz
frequencies in common use. The body is slightly less sensitive for DC (
AC presents a greater hazard. At higher and higher frequencies, the body becomes progressively less sensitive to
any effects that involve nerves. This is related to the maximum rates at which nerves can fire or be stimulated. At
very high frequencies, electrical current travels only on the surface of a person. Thus a wart can be burned off with
very high frequency current without causing the heart to stop. (Do not try this at home with 60-Hz AC!) Some of the
spectacular demonstrations of electricity, in which high-voltage arcs are passed through the air and over people’s
bodies, employ high frequencies and low currents. (See Figure 20.23.) Electrical safety devices and techniques are
discussed in detail in Electrical Safety: Systems and Devices.

), mildly confirming Edison’s claims that

FIGURE 20.23 Is this electric arc dangerous? The answer depends on the AC frequency and the power involved. (credit: Khimich Alex,
Wikimedia Commons)

20.7 Nerve Conduction–Electrocardiograms

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

• Explain the process by which electric signals are transmitted along a neuron.
• Explain the effects myelin sheaths have on signal propagation.
• Explain what the features of an ECG signal indicate.

Nerve Conduction

Electric currents in the vastly complex system of billions of nerves in our body allow us to sense the world, control
parts of our body, and think. These are representative of the three major functions of nerves. First, nerves carry
messages from our sensory organs and others to the central nervous system, consisting of the brain and spinal cord.
Second, nerves carry messages from the central nervous system to muscles and other organs. Third, nerves

886

20 • Electric Current, Resistance, and Ohm's Law

transmit and process signals within the central nervous system. The sheer number of nerve cells and the incredibly
greater number of connections between them makes this system the subtle wonder that it is. Nerve conduction is a
general term for electrical signals carried by nerve cells. It is one aspect of bioelectricity, or electrical effects in and
created by biological systems.

Nerve cells, properly called neurons, look different from other cells—they have tendrils, some of them many
centimeters long, connecting them with other cells. (See Figure 20.24.) Signals arrive at the cell body across
synapsesor through dendrites, stimulating the neuron to generate its own signal, sent along its long axonto other
nerve or muscle cells. Signals may arrive from many other locations and be transmitted to yet others, conditioning
the synapses by use, giving the system its complexity and its ability to learn.

FIGURE 20.24 A neuron with its dendrites and long axon. Signals in the form of electric currents reach the cell body through dendrites and
across synapses, stimulating the neuron to generate its own signal sent down the axon. The number of interconnections can be far greater
than shown here.

The method by which these electric currents are generated and transmitted is more complex than the simple
movement of free charges in a conductor, but it can be understood with principles already discussed in this text. The
most important of these are the Coulomb force and diffusion.

,

, and

(these are sodium, potassium, and chlorine ions with single plus

Figure 20.25 illustrates how a voltage (potential difference) is created across the cell membrane of a neuron in its
resting state. This thin membrane separates electrically neutral fluids having differing concentrations of ions, the
most important varieties being
or minus charges as indicated). As discussed in Molecular Transport Phenomena: Diffusion, Osmosis, and Related
Processes, free ions will diffuse from a region of high concentration to one of low concentration. But the cell
membrane is semipermeable, meaning that some ions may cross it while others cannot. In its resting state, the cell
membrane is permeable to
thus creates the layers
of positive and negative charge on the outside and inside of the membrane. The Coulomb force prevents the ions
from diffusing across in their entirety. Once the charge layer has built up, the repulsion of like charges prevents more
from moving across, and the attraction of unlike charges prevents more from leaving either side. The result is two
layers of charge right on the membrane, with diffusion being balanced by the Coulomb force. A tiny fraction of the
charges move across and the fluids remain neutral (other ions are present), while a separation of charge and a
voltage have been created across the membrane.

, and impermeable to

. Diffusion of

and

and

Access for free at openstax.org

20.7 • Nerve Conduction–Electrocardiograms

887

FIGURE 20.25 The semipermeable membrane of a cell has different concentrations of ions inside and out. Diffusion moves the

and
ions in the direction shown, until the Coulomb force halts further transfer. This results in a layer of positive charge on the outside, a

layer of negative charge on the inside, and thus a voltage across the cell membrane. The membrane is normally impermeable to

.

FIGURE 20.26 An action potential is the pulse of voltage inside a nerve cell graphed here. It is caused by movements of ions across the cell
membrane as shown. Depolarization occurs when a stimulus makes the membrane permeable to
membrane again becomes impermeable to
maintains the concentration differences, but the cell may fire hundreds of times in rapid succession without seriously depleting them.

ions. Repolarization follows as the
moves from high to low concentration. In the long term, active transport slowly

and

The separation of charge creates a potential difference of 70 to 90 mV across the cell membrane. While this is a
small voltage, the resulting electric field (
) across the only 8-nm-thick membrane is immense (on the order
of 11 MV/m!) and has fundamental effects on its structure and permeability. Now, if the exterior of a neuron is taken
to be at 0 V, then the interior has a resting potentialof about –90 mV. Such voltages are created across the
membranes of almost all types of animal cells but are largest in nerve and muscle cells. In fact, fully 25% of the
energy used by cells goes toward creating and maintaining these potentials.

Electric currents along the cell membrane are created by any stimulus that changes the membrane’s permeability.
The membrane thus temporarily becomes permeable to
Coulomb force. This inrush of
positive. The depolarization causes the membrane to again become impermeable to
quickly returns the cell to its resting potential, or repolarizesit. This sequence of events results in a voltage pulse,

, which then rushes in, driven both by diffusion and the
first neutralizes the inside membrane, or depolarizesit, and then makes it slightly

, and the movement of

888

20 • Electric Current, Resistance, and Ohm's Law

called the action potential. (See Figure 20.26.) Only small fractions of the ions move, so that the cell can fire many
. Eventually, the cell must replenish
hundreds of times without depleting the excess concentrations of
these ions to maintain the concentration differences that create bioelectricity. This sodium-potassium pump is an
example of active transport, wherein cell energy is used to move ions across membranes against diffusion gradients
and the Coulomb force.

and

The action potential is a voltage pulse at one location on a cell membrane. How does it get transmitted along the cell
membrane, and in particular down an axon, as a nerve impulse? The answer is that the changing voltage and electric
fields affect the permeability of the adjacent cell membrane, so that the same process takes place there. The
adjacent membrane depolarizes, affecting the membrane further down, and so on, as illustrated in Figure 20.27.
Thus the action potential stimulated at one location triggers a nerve impulsethat moves slowly (about 1 m/s) along
the cell membrane.

Access for free at openstax.org

20.7 • Nerve Conduction–Electrocardiograms

889

FIGURE 20.27 A nerve impulse is the propagation of an action potential along a cell membrane. A stimulus causes an action potential at
one location, which changes the permeability of the adjacent membrane, causing an action potential there. This in turn affects the
membrane further down, so that the action potential moves slowly (in electrical terms) along the cell membrane. Although the impulse is
due to

going across the membrane, it is equivalent to a wave of charge moving along the outside and inside of the membrane.

and

Some axons, like that in Figure 20.24, are sheathed with myelin, consisting of fat-containing cells. Figure 20.28
shows an enlarged view of an axon having myelin sheaths characteristically separated by unmyelinated gaps (called
nodes of Ranvier). This arrangement gives the axon a number of interesting properties. Since myelin is an insulator,
it prevents signals from jumping between adjacent nerves (cross talk). Additionally, the myelinated regions transmit
electrical signals at a very high speed, as an ordinary conductor or resistor would. There is no action potential in the
myelinated regions, so that no cell energy is used in them. There is an
signal loss in the myelin, but the signal is
regenerated in the gaps, where the voltage pulse triggers the action potential at full voltage. So a myelinated axon
transmits a nerve impulse faster, with less energy consumption, and is better protected from cross talk than an
unmyelinated one. Not all axons are myelinated, so that cross talk and slow signal transmission are a characteristic

890

20 • Electric Current, Resistance, and Ohm's Law

of the normal operation of these axons, another variable in the nervous system.

The degeneration or destruction of the myelin sheaths that surround the nerve fibers impairs signal transmission
and can lead to numerous neurological effects. One of the most prominent of these diseases comes from the body’s
own immune system attacking the myelin in the central nervous system—multiple sclerosis. MS symptoms include
fatigue, vision problems, weakness of arms and legs, loss of balance, and tingling or numbness in one’s extremities
(neuropathy). It is more apt to strike younger adults, especially females. Causes might come from infection,
environmental or geographic affects, or genetics. At the moment there is no known cure for MS.

Most animal cells can fire or create their own action potential. Muscle cells contract when they fire and are often
induced to do so by a nerve impulse. In fact, nerve and muscle cells are physiologically similar, and there are even
hybrid cells, such as in the heart, that have characteristics of both nerves and muscles. Some animals, like the
infamous electric eel (see Figure 20.29), use muscles ganged so that their voltages add in order to create a shock
great enough to stun prey.

FIGURE 20.28 Propagation of a nerve impulse down a myelinated axon, from left to right. The signal travels very fast and without energy
input in the myelinated regions, but it loses voltage. It is regenerated in the gaps. The signal moves faster than in unmyelinated axons and is
insulated from signals in other nerves, limiting cross talk.

FIGURE 20.29 An electric eel flexes its muscles to create a voltage that stuns prey. (credit: chrisbb, Flickr)

Electrocardiograms

Just as nerve impulses are transmitted by depolarization and repolarization of adjacent membrane, the
depolarization that causes muscle contraction can also stimulate adjacent muscle cells to depolarize (fire) and
contract. Thus, a depolarization wave can be sent across the heart, coordinating its rhythmic contractions and
enabling it to perform its vital function of propelling blood through the circulatory system. Figure 20.30 is a
simplified graphic of a depolarization wave spreading across the heart from the sinoarterial (SA) node, the heart’s
natural pacemaker.

Access for free at openstax.org

20.7 • Nerve Conduction–Electrocardiograms

891

FIGURE 20.30 The outer surface of the heart changes from positive to negative during depolarization. This wave of depolarization is
spreading from the top of the heart and is represented by a vector pointing in the direction of the wave. This vector is a voltage (potential
difference) vector. Three electrodes, labeled RA, LA, and LL, are placed on the patient. Each pair (called leads I, II, and III) measures a
component of the depolarization vector and is graphed in an ECG.

An electrocardiogram (ECG) is a record of the voltages created by the wave of depolarization and subsequent
repolarization in the heart. (They are also abbreviated EKG.) Voltages between pairs of electrodes placed on the
chest are vector components of the voltage wave on the heart. Standard ECGs have 12 or more electrodes, but only
three are shown in Figure 20.30 for clarity. Decades ago, three-electrode ECGs were performed by placing
electrodes on the left and right arms and the left leg. The voltage between the right arm and the left leg is called the
lead II potentialand is the most often graphed. We shall examine the lead II potential as an indicator of heart-
muscle function and see that it is coordinated with arterial blood pressure as well.

Heart function and its four-chamber action are explored in Viscosity and Laminar Flow; Poiseuille’s Law. Basically,
the right and left atria receive blood from the body and lungs, respectively, and pump the blood into the ventricles.
The right and left ventricles, in turn, pump blood through the lungs and the rest of the body, respectively.
Depolarization of the heart muscle causes it to contract. After contraction it is repolarized to ready it for the next
beat. The ECG measures components of depolarization and repolarization of the heart muscle and can yield
significant information on the functioning and malfunctioning of the heart.

Figure 20.31 shows an ECG of the lead II potential and a graph of the corresponding arterial blood pressure. The
major features are labeled P, Q, R, S, and T. The P waveis generated by the depolarization and contraction of the
atria as they pump blood into the ventricles. The QRS complexis created by the depolarization of the ventricles as
they pump blood to the lungs and body. Since the shape of the heart and the path of the depolarization wave are not
simple, the QRS complex has this typical shape and time span. The lead II QRS signal also masks the repolarization
of the atria, which occur at the same time. Finally, the T waveis generated by the repolarization of the ventricles and
is followed by the next P wave in the next heartbeat. Arterial blood pressure varies with each part of the heartbeat,
with systolic (maximum) pressure occurring closely after the QRS complex, which signals contraction of the
ventricles.

FIGURE 20.31 A lead II ECG with corresponding arterial blood pressure. The QRS complex is created by the depolarization and contraction
of the ventricles and is followed shortly by the maximum or systolic blood pressure. See text for further description.

892

20 • Electric Current, Resistance, and Ohm's Law

Taken together, the 12 leads of a state-of-the-art ECG can yield a wealth of information about the heart. For
example, regions of damaged heart tissue, called infarcts, reflect electrical waves and are apparent in one or more
lead potentials. Subtle changes due to slight or gradual damage to the heart are most readily detected by comparing
a recent ECG to an older one. This is particularly the case since individual heart shape, size, and orientation can
cause variations in ECGs from one individual to another. ECG technology has advanced to the point where a portable
ECG monitor can be incorporated into wearable devices and other small objects. See Figure 20.32.

FIGURE 20.32 In a 12-lead ECG, six electrodes are placed on the chest, and four electrodes are placed on the limbs.

PHET EXPLORATIONS

Neuron
Stimulate a neuron and monitor what happens. Pause, rewind, and move forward in time in order to observe the ions
as they move across the neuron membrane.

Click to view content (https://openstax.org/books/college-physics-2e/pages/20-7-nerve-
conductionelectrocardiograms)

Access for free at openstax.org

20 • Glossary

893

Glossary

AC current current that fluctuates sinusoidally with
time, expressed as I = I0 sin 2πft, where Iis the
current at time t, I0 is the peak current, and fis the
frequency in hertz

AC voltage voltage that fluctuates sinusoidally with
time, expressed as V = V0 sin 2πft, where Vis the
voltage at time t, V0 is the peak voltage, and fis the
frequency in hertz

alternating current

(AC) the flow of electric charge

that periodically reverses direction

ampere (amp) the SI unit for current; 1 A = 1 C/s
bioelectricity electrical effects in and created by

biological systems

current Iis proportional to the potential difference
V, ∝ V; it is often written as I = V/R, where Ris the
resistance

ohmic a type of a material for which Ohm's law is

valid

resistance the electric property that impedes

current; for ohmic materials, it is the ratio of voltage
to current, R = V/I

resistivity an intrinsic property of a material,
independent of its shape or size, directly
proportional to the resistance, denoted by ρ

rms current

the root mean square of the current,

, where I0 is the peak current, in an

direct current

(DC) the flow of electric charge in only

AC system

one direction

drift velocity the average velocity at which free
charges flow in response to an electric field

electric current

the rate at which charge flows, I=

ΔQ/Δt

electric power

the rate at which electrical energy is
supplied by a source or dissipated by a device; it is
the product of current times voltage

electrocardiogram (ECG) usually abbreviated ECG, a
record of voltages created by depolarization and
repolarization, especially in the heart

microshock sensitive a condition in which a person’s
skin resistance is bypassed, possibly by a medical
procedure, rendering the person vulnerable to
electrical shock at currents about 1/1000 the
normally required level

nerve conduction the transport of electrical signals

by nerve cells

ohm the unit of resistance, given by 1Ω = 1 V/A
Ohm’s law an empirical relation stating that the

Section Summary

20.1 Current

• Electric current

is the rate at which charge flows,

given by

where
through an area in time

is the amount of charge passing
.

• The direction of conventional current is taken as
the direction in which positive charge moves.
• The SI unit for current is the ampere (A), where

• Current is the flow of free charges, such as

electrons and ions.

• Drift velocity

is the average speed at which

these charges move.

rms voltage the root mean square of the voltage,

, where V0 is the peak voltage, in an

AC system

semipermeable property of a membrane that allows

only certain types of ions to cross it

shock hazard when electric current passes through a

person

short circuit also known as a “short,” a low-

resistance path between terminals of a voltage
source

simple circuit a circuit with a single voltage source

and a single resistor

temperature coefficient of resistivity an empirical

quantity, denoted by α, which describes the change
in resistance or resistivity of a material with
temperature

thermal hazard a hazard in which electric current

causes undesired thermal effects

• Current

is proportional to drift velocity

, as
expressed in the relationship
. Here,
is the current through a wire of cross-sectional
. The wire’s material has a free-charge
area
density , and each carrier has charge and a drift
velocity

.

• Electrical signals travel at speeds about

times greater than the drift velocity of free
electrons.

20.2 Ohm’s Law: Resistance and Simple
Circuits

• A simple circuit isone in which there is a single

voltage source and a single resistance.

• One statement of Ohm’s law gives the relationship

894

20 • Conceptual Questions

between current
a simple circuit to be

, voltage

, and resistance

in

• Resistance has units of ohms (
.

and amperes by
• There is a voltage or

drop across a resistor,

), related to volts

caused by the current flowing through it, given by

.

•

only one direction. It refers to systems where the
source voltage is constant.

• The voltage source of an alternating current (AC)

system puts out
voltage at time ,
the frequency in hertz.
In a simple circuit,

is the peak voltage, and

, where

is the
is

and AC current is

20.3 Resistance and Resistivity

• The resistance

of a cylinder of length

and

cross-sectional area

is

, where is the

resistivity of the material.

• Values of

in Table 20.1 show that materials fall
into three groups—conductors, semiconductors,
and insulators.

• Temperature affects resistivity; for relatively small

temperature changes

, resistivity is

and

, where is the current at time ,
is the peak current.

• The average AC power is

.

• Average (rms) current

and average (rms)

voltage

are

and

,

where rms stands for root mean square.

• Thus,

.

• Ohm’s law for AC is

.

• Expressions for the average power of an AC circuit

, where

is the original

are

,

, and

resistivity and is the temperature coefficient of
resistivity.

• Table 20.2 gives values for
coefficient of resistivity.

, the temperature

, analogous to the expressions for

DC circuits.

20.6 Electric Hazards and the Human Body

• The resistance
temperature:
original resistance, and
the temperature change.

of an object also varies with

, where
is the resistance after

is the

• The two types of electric hazards are thermal

(excessive power) and shock (current through a
person).

• Shock severity is determined by current, path,

20.4 Electric Power and Energy

duration, and AC frequency.

• Electric power

is the rate (in watts) that energy
is supplied by a source or dissipated by a device.

• Three expressions for electrical power are

and

• Table 20.3 lists shock hazards as a function of

current.

• Figure 20.22 graphs the threshold current for two

hazards as a function of frequency.

20.7 Nerve Conduction–Electrocardiograms

• Electric potentials in neurons and other cells are
created by ionic concentration differences across
semipermeable membranes.

• The energy used by a device with a power

over a

• Stimuli change the permeability and create action

time is

.

20.5 Alternating Current versus Direct
Current

potentials that propagate along neurons.

• Myelin sheaths speed this process and reduce the

needed energy input.

• This process in the heart can be measured with an

• Direct current (DC) is the flow of electric current in

electrocardiogram (ECG).

Conceptual Questions

20.1 Current

1. Can a wire carry a current and still be neutral—that

is, have a total charge of zero? Explain.

2. Car batteries are rated in ampere-hours (
what physical quantity do ampere-hours
correspond (voltage, charge, . . .), and what
relationship do ampere-hours have to energy
content?

). To

Access for free at openstax.org

20 • Conceptual Questions

895

3. If two different wires having identical cross-

sectional areas carry the same current, will the drift
velocity be higher or lower in the better conductor?
Explain in terms of the equation

, by

considering how the density of charge carriers
relates to whether or not a material is a good
conductor.

4. Why are two conducting paths from a voltage

source to an electrical device needed to operate the
device?

5. In cars, one battery terminal is connected to the
metal body. How does this allow a single wire to
supply current to electrical devices rather than two
wires?

6. Why isn’t a bird sitting on a high-voltage power line
electrocuted? Contrast this with the situation in
which a large bird hits two wires simultaneously
with its wings.

20.2 Ohm’s Law: Resistance and Simple
Circuits

7. The

drop across a resistor means that there is a
change in potential or voltage across the resistor. Is
there any change in current as it passes through a
resistor? Explain.

8. How is the

drop in a resistor similar to the

pressure drop in a fluid flowing through a pipe?

20.3 Resistance and Resistivity

9. In which of the three semiconducting materials
listed in Table 20.1 do impurities supply free
charges? (Hint: Examine the range of resistivity for
each and determine whether the pure
semiconductor has the higher or lower
conductivity.)

10. Does the resistance of an object depend on the path
current takes through it? Consider, for example, a
rectangular bar—is its resistance the same along its
length as across its width? (See Figure 20.33.)

FIGURE 20.33 Does current taking two different paths through the
same object encounter different resistance?

11. If aluminum and copper wires of the same length

have the same resistance, which has the larger
diameter? Why?

12. Explain why

for the
temperature variation of the resistance
object is not as accurate as
which gives the temperature variation of resistivity

of an
,

.

20.4 Electric Power and Energy

13. Why do incandescent lightbulbs grow dim late in
their lives, particularly just before their filaments
break?

14. The power dissipated in a resistor is given by
, which means power decreases if

resistance increases. Yet this power is also given
, which means power increases if
by
resistance increases. Explain why there is no
contradiction here.

20.5 Alternating Current versus Direct
Current

15. Give an example of a use of AC power other than
in the household. Similarly, give an example of a
use of DC power other than that supplied by
batteries.

16. Why do voltage, current, and power go through
zero 120 times per second for 60-Hz AC
electricity?

17. You are riding in a train, gazing into the distance
through its window. As close objects streak by,
you notice that the nearby fluorescent lights make
dashedstreaks. Explain.

20.6 Electric Hazards and the Human Body

18. Using an ohmmeter, a student measures the

resistance between various points on his body.
They find that the resistance between two points
on the same finger is about the same as the
resistance between two points on opposite
hands—both are several hundred thousand ohms.
Furthermore, the resistance decreases when more
skin is brought into contact with the probes of the
ohmmeter. Finally, there is a dramatic drop in
resistance (to a few thousand ohms) when the
skin is wet. Explain these observations and their
implications regarding skin and internal resistance
of the human body.

19. What are the two major hazards of electricity?
20. Why isn’t a short circuit a shock hazard?
21. What determines the severity of a shock? Can you
say that a certain voltage is hazardous without
further information?

896

20 • Problems & Exercises

22. An electrified needle is used to burn off warts,
with the circuit being completed by having the
patient sit on a large butt plate. Why is this plate
large?

27. Why is the resistance of wet skin so much smaller
than dry, and why do blood and other bodily fluids
have low resistances?

28. Could a person on intravenous infusion (an IV) be

23. Some surgery is performed with high-voltage

microshock sensitive?

29. In view of the small currents that cause shock
hazards and the larger currents that circuit
breakers and fuses interrupt, how do they play a
role in preventing shock hazards?

20.7 Nerve Conduction–Electrocardiograms

30. Note that in Figure 20.25, both the concentration
gradient and the Coulomb force tend to move
ions into the cell. What prevents this?

31. Define depolarization, repolarization, and the

action potential.

32. Explain the properties of myelinated nerves in

terms of the insulating properties of myelin.

electricity passing from a metal scalpel through
the tissue being cut. Considering the nature of
electric fields at the surface of conductors, why
would you expect most of the current to flow from
the sharp edge of the scalpel? Do you think high-
or low-frequency AC is used?

24. Some devices often used in bathrooms, such as

hairdryers, often have safety messages saying “Do
not use when the bathtub or basin is full of water.”
Why is this so?

25. We are often advised to not flick electric switches

with wet hands, dry your hand first. We are also
advised to never throw water on an electric fire.
Why is this so?

26. Before working on a power transmission line,
experts will touch the line with the back of the
hand as a final check that the voltage is zero. Why
the back of the hand?

Problems & Exercises

20.1 Current

1. What is the current in milliamperes produced by the
solar cells of a pocket calculator through which
4.00 C of charge passes in 4.00 h?

2. A total of 600 C of charge passes through a

flashlight in 0.500 h. What is the average current?
3. What is the current when a typical static charge of

moves from your finger to a metal

doorknob in

?

4. Find the current when 2.00 nC jumps between your

comb and hair over a

time interval.

5. A large lightning bolt had a 20,000-A current and
moved 30.0 C of charge. What was its duration?
6. The 200-A current through a spark plug moves

0.300 mC of charge. How long does the spark last?

Access for free at openstax.org

20 • Problems & Exercises

897

13. A large cyclotron directs a beam of

nuclei

nuclei per second is this? (b)

onto a target with a beam current of 0.250 mA. (a)
How many
How long does it take for 1.00 C to strike the
target? (c) How long before 1.00 mol of
nuclei strike the target?

14. Repeat the above example on Example 20.3, but

for a wire made of silver and given there is one
free electron per silver atom.

15. Using the results of the above example on

Example 20.3, find the drift velocity in a copper
wire of twice the diameter and carrying 20.0 A.

16. A 14-gauge copper wire has a diameter of 1.628

mm. What magnitude current flows when the drift
velocity is 1.00 mm/s? (See above example on
Example 20.3 for useful information.)

17. SPEAR, a storage ring about 72.0 m in diameter at

the Stanford Linear Accelerator (closed in 2009),
has a 20.0-A circulating beam of electrons that are
moving at nearly the speed of light. (See Figure
20.35.) How many electrons are in the beam?

FIGURE 20.35 Electrons circulating in the storage ring called
SPEAR constitute a 20.0-A current. Because they travel
close to the speed of light, each electron completes many
orbits in each second.

20.2 Ohm’s Law: Resistance and Simple
Circuits

18. What current flows through the bulb of a 3.00-V

flashlight when its hot resistance is

?
19. Calculate the effective resistance of a pocket

calculator that has a 1.35-V battery and through
which 0.200 mA flows.

20. What is the effective resistance of a car’s starter
motor when 150 A flows through it as the car
battery applies 11.0 V to the motor?
21. How many volts are supplied to operate an

indicator light on a DVD player that has a
resistance of
through it?

, given that 25.0 mA passes

7. (a) A defibrillator sends a 6.00-A current through
the chest of a patient by applying a 10,000-V
potential as in the figure below. What is the
resistance of the path? (b) The defibrillator paddles
make contact with the patient through a conducting
gel that greatly reduces the path resistance.
Discuss the difficulties that would ensue if a larger
voltage were used to produce the same current
through the patient, but with the path having
perhaps 50 times the resistance. (Hint: The current
must be about the same, so a higher voltage would
imply greater power. Use this equation for power:

.)

FIGURE 20.34 The capacitor in a defibrillation unit drives a
current through the heart of a patient.

and a 10.0-mA

8. During open-heart surgery, a defibrillator can be
used to bring a patient out of cardiac arrest. The
resistance of the path is
current is needed. What voltage should be applied?
9. (a) A defibrillator passes 12.0 A of current through
the torso of a person for 0.0100 s. How much
charge moves? (b) How many electrons pass
through the wires connected to the patient? (See
figure two problems earlier.)

10. A clock battery wears out after moving 10,000 C

of charge through the clock at a rate of 0.500 mA.
(a) How long did the clock run? (b) How many
electrons per second flowed?

11. The batteries of a submerged non-nuclear

submarine supply 1000 A at full speed ahead.
How long does it take to move Avogadro’s number
( ×

) of electrons at this rate?

12. Electron guns are used in X-ray tubes. The

electrons are accelerated through a relatively
large voltage and directed onto a metal target,
producing X-rays. (a) How many electrons per
second strike the target if the current is 0.500
mA? (b) What charge strikes the target in 0.750 s?

898

20 • Problems & Exercises

22. (a) Find the voltage drop in an extension cord

34. Assuming a constant temperature coefficient of

resistance and through which

having a
5.00 A is flowing. (b) A cheaper cord utilizes
thinner wire and has a resistance of
What is the voltage drop in it when 5.00 A flows?
(c) Why is the voltage to whatever appliance is
being used reduced by this amount? What is the
effect on the appliance?

.

23. A power transmission line is hung from metal

towers with glass insulators having a resistance of

×

What current flows through the

insulator if the voltage is 200 kV? (Some high-
voltage lines are DC.)

20.3 Resistance and Resistivity

24. What is the resistance of a 20.0-m-long piece of
12-gauge copper wire having a 2.053-mm
diameter?

25. The diameter of 0-gauge copper wire is 8.252

mm. Find the resistance of a 1.00-km length of
such wire used for power transmission.

26. If the 0.010-mm diameter tungsten filament in a

resistivity, what is the maximum percent decrease
in the resistance of a constantan wire starting at

?

35. A wire is drawn through a die, stretching it to four

times its original length. By what factor does its
resistance increase?

36. A copper wire has a resistance of

at
, and an iron wire has a resistance of
at the same temperature. At what

temperature are their resistances equal?
37. (a) Digital medical thermometers determine

) when it is at the same

temperature by measuring the resistance of a
semiconductor device called a thermistor (which
has
temperature as the patient. What is a patient’s
temperature if the thermistor’s resistance at that
temperature is 82.0% of its value at
(normal body temperature)? (b) The negative
value for may not be maintained for very low
temperatures. Discuss why and whether this is the
case here. (Hint: Resistance can’t become
negative.)

light bulb is to have a resistance of

at

38. Integrated Concepts

, how long should it be?

27. Find the ratio of the diameter of aluminum to

copper wire, if they have the same resistance per
unit length (as they might in household wiring).

28. What current flows through a 2.54-cm-diameter
rod of pure silicon that is 20.0 cm long, when

is applied to it? (Such a rod may be

used to make nuclear-particle detectors, for
example.)

29. (a) To what temperature must you raise a copper
, to double its resistance,

wire, originally at
neglecting any changes in dimensions? (b) Does
this happen in household wiring under ordinary
circumstances?

30. A resistor made of Nichrome wire is used in an
application where its resistance cannot change
more than 1.00% from its value at
. Over
what temperature range can it be used?

(a) Redo Exercise 9.25 taking into account the
thermal expansion of the tungsten filament. You
may assume a thermal expansion coefficient of

×

. (b) By what percentage does your

answer differ from that in the example?

39. Unreasonable Results

(a) To what temperature must you raise a resistor
made of constantan to double its resistance,
assuming a constant temperature coefficient of
resistivity? (b) To cut it in half? (c) What is
unreasonable about these results? (d) Which
assumptions are unreasonable, or which premises
are inconsistent?

20.4 Electric Power and Energy

40. What is the power of a
bolt having a current of

lightning

?

31. Of what material is a resistor made if its resistance

41. What power is supplied to the starter motor of a

is 40.0% greater at

than at

?

32. An electronic device designed to operate at any

temperature in the range from
contains pure carbon resistors. By what factor
does their resistance increase over this range?

33. (a) Of what material is a wire made, if it is 25.0 m

large truck that draws 250 A of current from a
24.0-V battery hookup?

42. A charge of 4.00 C of charge passes through a

pocket calculator’s solar cells in 4.00 h. What is
the power output, given the calculator’s voltage
output is 3.00 V? (See Figure 20.36.)

long with a 0.100 mm diameter and has a
resistance of
resistance at

at

?

? (b) What is its

Access for free at openstax.org

20 • Problems & Exercises

899

51. With a 1200-W toaster, how much electrical

energy is needed to make a slice of toast (cooking
time = 1 minute)? At
, how much
does this cost?

52. What would be the maximum cost of a CFL such

that the total cost (investment plus operating)
would be the same for both CFL and incandescent
60-W bulbs? Assume the cost of the incandescent
bulb is 25 cents and that electricity costs

. Calculate the cost for 1000 hours,

as in the cost effectiveness of CFL example.
53. Some makes of older cars have 6.00-V electrical
systems. (a) What is the hot resistance of a
30.0-W headlight in such a car? (b) What current
flows through it?

54. Alkaline batteries have the advantage of putting
out constant voltage until very nearly the end of
their life. How long will an alkaline battery rated at

and 1.58 V keep a 1.00-W flashlight

bulb burning?

55. A cauterizer, used to stop bleeding in surgery, puts
out 2.00 mA at 15.0 kV. (a) What is its power
output? (b) What is the resistance of the path?
56. The average television is said to be on 6 hours per
day. Estimate the yearly cost of electricity to
operate 100 million TVs, assuming their power
consumption averages 150 W and the cost of
electricity averages

.

57. An old lightbulb draws only 50.0 W, rather than its

original 60.0 W, due to evaporative thinning of its
filament. By what factor is its diameter reduced,
assuming uniform thinning along its length?
Neglect any effects caused by temperature
differences.

58. 00-gauge copper wire has a diameter of 9.266
mm. Calculate the power loss in a kilometer of
such wire when it carries

.

FIGURE 20.36 The strip of solar cells just above the keys of this
calculator convert light to electricity to supply its energy needs.
(credit: Evan-Amos, Wikimedia Commons)

43. How many watts does a flashlight that has

pass through it in 0.500 h use if its

voltage is 3.00 V?

44. Find the power dissipated in each of these

extension cords: (a) an extension cord having a

resistance and through which 5.00 A is

flowing; (b) a cheaper cord utilizing thinner wire
and with a resistance of

45. Verify that the units of a volt-ampere are watts, as

implied by the equation

.

46. Show that the units
the equation
47. Show that the units
by the equation

.

.

, as implied by

, as implied

48. Verify the energy unit equivalence that
×

.

49. Electrons in an X-ray tube are accelerated through

and directed toward a target to

produce X-rays. Calculate the power of the
electron beam in this tube if it has a current of
15.0 mA.

50. An electric water heater consumes 5.00 kW for
2.00 h per day. What is the cost of running it for
one year if electricity costs
?
See Figure 20.37.

FIGURE 20.37 On-demand electric hot water heater. Heat is
supplied to water only when needed. (credit: aviddavid,
Flickr)

900

20 • Problems & Exercises

59. Integrated Concepts

63. Integrated Concepts

Cold vaporizers pass a current through water,
evaporating it with only a small increase in
temperature. One such home device is rated at
3.50 A and utilizes 120 V AC with 95.0%
efficiency. (a) What is the vaporization rate in
grams per minute? (b) How much water must you
put into the vaporizer for 8.00 h of overnight
operation? (See Figure 20.38.)

Hydroelectric generators (see Figure 20.39) at
Hoover Dam produce a maximum current of

at 250 kV. (a) What is the power

output? (b) The water that powers the generators
enters and leaves the system at low speed (thus
its kinetic energy does not change) but loses 160
m in altitude. How many cubic meters per second
are needed, assuming 85.0% efficiency?

FIGURE 20.39 Hydroelectric generators at the Hoover dam.
(credit: Jon Sullivan)

64. Integrated Concepts

(a) Assuming 95.0% efficiency for the conversion
of electrical power by the motor, what current
must the 12.0-V batteries of a 750-kg electric car
be able to supply: (a) To accelerate from rest to
25.0 m/s in 1.00 min? (b) To climb a

-high hill in 2.00 min at a constant
25.0-m/s speed while exerting
of
force to overcome air resistance and friction? (c)
To travel at a constant 25.0-m/s speed, exerting a
force to overcome air resistance and

friction? See Figure 20.40.

FIGURE 20.40 This REVAi, an electric car, gets recharged on
a street in London. (credit: Frank Hebbert)

FIGURE 20.38 This cold vaporizer passes current directly
through water, vaporizing it directly with relatively little
temperature increase.

60. Integrated Concepts

(a) What energy is dissipated by a lightning bolt
having a 20,000-A current, a voltage of

, and a length of 1.00 ms? (b)

What mass of tree sap could be raised from

to its boiling point and then evaporated by

this energy, assuming sap has the same thermal
characteristics as water?

61. Integrated Concepts

What current must be produced by a 12.0-V
battery-operated bottle warmer in order to heat
75.0 g of glass, 250 g of baby formula, and
to

of aluminum from

in 5.00 min?

62. Integrated Concepts

How much time is needed for a surgical cauterizer
to raise the temperature of 1.00 g of tissue from

to

and then boil away 0.500 g of
water, if it puts out 2.00 mA at 15.0 kV? Ignore
heat transfer to the surroundings.

Access for free at openstax.org

65. Integrated Concepts

71. Construct Your Own Problem

20 • Problems & Exercises

901

A light-rail commuter train draws 630 A of 650-V
DC electricity when accelerating. (a) What is its
power consumption rate in kilowatts? (b) How
long does it take to reach 20.0 m/s starting from

rest if its loaded mass is

×

, assuming

95.0% efficiency and constant power? (c) Find its
average acceleration. (d) Discuss how the
acceleration you found for the light-rail train
compares to what might be typical for an
automobile.

66. Integrated Concepts

. What is its mass per

(a) An aluminum power transmission line has a
resistance of
kilometer? (b) What is the mass per kilometer of a
copper line having the same resistance? A lower
resistance would shorten the heating time.
Discuss the practical limits to speeding the
heating by lowering the resistance.

67. Integrated Concepts

(a) An immersion heater utilizing 120 V can raise
aluminum cup
the temperature of a
containing 350 g of water from
in 2.00 min. Find its resistance, assuming it is
constant during the process. (b) A lower
resistance would shorten the heating time.
Discuss the practical limits to speeding the
heating by lowering the resistance.

to

68. Integrated Concepts

to

(a) What is the cost of heating a hot tub containing
1500 kg of water from
assuming 75.0% efficiency to account for heat
transfer to the surroundings? The cost of
electricity is
used by the 220-V AC electric heater, if this took
4.00 h?

. (b) What current was

,

69. Unreasonable Results

(a) What current is needed to transmit

of power at 480 V? (b) What

resistance? (c) What is

power is dissipated by the transmission lines if
they have a
unreasonable about this result? (d) Which
assumptions are unreasonable, or which premises
are inconsistent?
70. Unreasonable Results

(a) What current is needed to transmit

of power at 10.0 kV? (b) Find the

resistance of 1.00 km of wire that would cause a
0.0100% power loss. (c) What is the diameter of a
1.00-km-long copper wire having this resistance?
(d) What is unreasonable about these results? (e)
Which assumptions are unreasonable, or which
premises are inconsistent?

Consider an electric immersion heater used to
heat a cup of water to make tea. Construct a
problem in which you calculate the needed
resistance of the heater so that it increases the
temperature of the water and cup in a reasonable
amount of time. Also calculate the cost of the
electrical energy used in your process. Among the
things to be considered are the voltage used, the
masses and heat capacities involved, heat losses,
and the time over which the heating takes place.
Your instructor may wish for you to consider a
thermal safety switch (perhaps bimetallic) that
will halt the process before damaging
temperatures are reached in the immersion unit.

20.5 Alternating Current versus Direct
Current

72. (a) What is the hot resistance of a 25-W light bulb
that runs on 120-V AC? (b) If the bulb’s operating
temperature is
?

, what is its resistance at

73. Certain heavy industrial equipment uses AC power

that has a peak voltage of 679 V. What is the rms
voltage?

74. A certain circuit breaker trips when the rms

current is 15.0 A. What is the corresponding peak
current?

75. Military aircraft use 400-Hz AC power, because it
is possible to design lighter-weight equipment at
this higher frequency. What is the time for one
complete cycle of this power?

76. A North American tourist takes his 25.0-W, 120-V

AC razor to Europe, finds a special adapter, and
plugs it into 240 V AC. Assuming constant
resistance, what power does the razor consume as
it is ruined?

77. In this problem, you will verify statements made

at the end of the power losses for Example 20.10.
(a) What current is needed to transmit 100 MW of
power at a voltage of 25.0 kV? (b) Find the power
loss in a
percent loss does this represent?

transmission line. (c) What

78. A small office-building air conditioner operates on

408-V AC and consumes 50.0 kW. (a) What is its
effective resistance? (b) What is the cost of
running the air conditioner during a hot summer
month when it is on 8.00 h per day for 30 days and
electricity costs

?

79. What is the peak power consumption of a 120-V

AC microwave oven that draws 10.0 A?

80. What is the peak current through a 500-W room
heater that operates on 120-V AC power?

902

20 • Problems & Exercises

81. Two different electrical devices have the same
power consumption, but one is meant to be
operated on 120-V AC and the other on 240-V AC.
(a) What is the ratio of their resistances? (b) What
is the ratio of their currents? (c) Assuming its
resistance is unaffected, by what factor will the
power increase if a 120-V AC device is connected
to 240-V AC?

82. Nichrome wire is used in some radiative heaters.
(a) Find the resistance needed if the average
power output is to be 1.00 kW utilizing 120-V AC.
(b) What length of Nichrome wire, having a cross-
sectional area of
operating temperature is
will it draw when first switched on?

, is needed if the

? (c) What power

83. Find the time after

when the instantaneous

voltage of 60-Hz AC first reaches the following
values: (a)

(c) 0.

(b)

84. (a) At what two times in the first period following
does the instantaneous voltage in 60-Hz AC

equal

? (b)

?

20.6 Electric Hazards and the Human Body

85. (a) How much power is dissipated in a short circuit

of 220-V AC through a resistance of
What current flows?

? (b)

86. What voltage is involved in a 1.44-kW short circuit

through a

resistance?

87. Find the current through a person and identify the
likely effect on her if she touches a 120-V AC
source: (a) if she is standing on a rubber mat and
offers a total resistance of
standing barefoot on wet grass and has a
resistance of only

; (b) if she is

.

88. While taking a bath, a person touches the metal

case of a radio. The path through the person to the
.
drainpipe and ground has a resistance of
What is the smallest voltage on the case of the
radio that could cause ventricular fibrillation?

89. Foolishly trying to fish a burning piece of bread
from a toaster with a metal butter knife, a man
comes into contact with 120-V AC. He does not
even feel it since, luckily, he is wearing rubber-
soled shoes. What is the minimum resistance of
the path the current follows through the person?

90. (a) During surgery, a current as small as

applied directly to the heart may cause ventricular
fibrillation. If the resistance of the exposed heart
, what is the smallest voltage that poses
is
this danger? (b) Does your answer imply that
special electrical safety precautions are needed?

Access for free at openstax.org

91. (a) What is the resistance of a 220-V AC short

circuit that generates a peak power of 96.8 kW?
(b) What would the average power be if the
voltage was 120 V AC?

92. A heart defibrillator passes 10.0 A through a

patient’s torso for 5.00 ms in an attempt to restore
normal beating. (a) How much charge passed? (b)
What voltage was applied if 500 J of energy was
dissipated? (c) What was the path’s resistance? (d)
Find the temperature increase caused in the 8.00
kg of affected tissue.
93. Integrated Concepts

A short circuit in a 120-V appliance cord has a
resistance. Calculate the temperature

rise of the 2.00 g of surrounding materials,
assuming their specific heat capacity is

and that it takes 0.0500 s for a
circuit breaker to interrupt the current. Is this
likely to be damaging?
94. Construct Your Own Problem

Consider a person working in an environment
where electric currents might pass through their
body. Construct a problem in which you calculate
the resistance of insulation needed to protect the
person from harm. Among the things to be
considered are the voltage to which the person
might be exposed, likely body resistance (dry, wet,
…), and acceptable currents (safe but sensed, safe
and unfelt, …).

20.7 Nerve Conduction–Electrocardiograms

95. Integrated Concepts

Use the ECG in Figure 20.31 to determine the
heart rate in beats per minute assuming a
constant time between beats.

96. Integrated Concepts

(a) Referring to Figure 20.31, find the time systolic
pressure lags behind the middle of the QRS
complex. (b) Discuss the reasons for the time lag.
97. Critical Thinking A copper wire of length 1.25 m is

. If there is

in a circuit. A current of 2.50 A flows through the
wire. (a) Initially, the circuit is at
an energy loss of 3.25 MJ in the first second
caused by the wire as soon as the circuit is turned
on, what is the radius of the wire? (b) After the
wire heats
, how much energy is being
dissipated by the circuit per second? Neglect the
effects of thermal expansion since the wire is
considered to be physically constrained from
expanding. Assume the current is maintained. (c)
At what temperature will the energy dissipation be
1.00% higher than it was at the beginning of the
experiment?

