CHAPTER 18
Electric Charge and Electric Field

FIGURE 18.1 Static electricity from this plastic slide causes the child’s hair to stand on end. The sliding motion stripped electrons away
from the child’s body, leaving an excess of positive charges, which repel each other along each strand of hair. (credit: Ken Bosma/Wikimedia
Commons)

CHAPTER OUTLINE

18.1 Static Electricity and Charge: Conservation of Charge

18.2 Conductors and Insulators

18.3 Coulomb’s Law

18.4 Electric Field: Concept of a Field Revisited

18.5 Electric Field Lines: Multiple Charges

18.6 Electric Forces in Biology

18.7 Conductors and Electric Fields in Static Equilibrium

18.8 Applications of Electrostatics

The image of American politician and scientist

INTRODUCTION TO ELECTRIC CHARGE AND ELECTRIC FIELD
Benjamin Franklin (1706–1790) flying a kite in a thunderstorm is familiar to every schoolchild. (See Figure 18.2.) In
this experiment, Franklin demonstrated a connection between lightning and static electricity. Sparks were drawn
from a key hung on a kite string during an electrical storm. These sparks were like those produced by static
electricity, such as the spark that jumps from your finger to a metal doorknob after you walk across a wool carpet.
What Franklin demonstrated in his dangerous experiment was a connection between phenomena on two different
scales: one the grand power of an electrical storm, the other an effect of more human proportions. Connections like
this one reveal the underlying unity of the laws of nature, an aspect we humans find particularly appealing.

774

18 • Electric Charge and Electric Field

FIGURE 18.2 When Benjamin Franklin demonstrated that lightning was related to static electricity, he made a connection that is now part
of the evidence that all directly experienced forces except the gravitational force are manifestations of the electromagnetic force.

Much has been written about Franklin. His experiments were only part of the life of a man who was a scientist,
inventor, revolutionary, statesman, and writer. Franklin’s experiments were not performed in isolation, nor were they
the only ones to reveal connections.

For example, the Italian scientist Luigi Galvani (1737–1798) performed a series of experiments in which static
electricity was used to stimulate contractions of leg muscles of dead frogs, an effect already known in humans
subjected to static discharges. But Galvani also found that if he joined two metal wires (say copper and zinc) end to
end and touched the other ends to muscles, he produced the same effect in frogs as static discharge. Alessandro
Volta (1745–1827), partly inspired by Galvani’s work, experimented with various combinations of metals and
developed the battery.

During the same era, other scientists made progress in discovering fundamental connections. The periodic table
was developed as the systematic properties of the elements were discovered. This influenced the development and
refinement of the concept of atoms as the basis of matter. Such submicroscopic descriptions of matter also help
explain a great deal more.

Atomic and molecular interactions, such as the forces of friction, cohesion, and adhesion, are now known to be
manifestations of the electromagnetic force. Static electricity is just one aspect of the electromagnetic force, which
also includes moving electricity and magnetism.

All the macroscopic forces that we experience directly, such as the sensations of touch and the tension in a rope, are
due to the electromagnetic force, one of the four fundamental forces in nature. The gravitational force, another
fundamental force, is actually sensed through the electromagnetic interaction of molecules, such as between those
in our feet and those on the top of a bathroom scale. (The other two fundamental forces, the strong nuclear force
and the weak nuclear force, cannot be sensed on the human scale.)

This chapter begins the study of electromagnetic phenomena at a fundamental level. The next several chapters will
cover static electricity, moving electricity, and magnetism—collectively known as electromagnetism. In this chapter,
we begin with the study of electric phenomena due to charges that are at least temporarily stationary, called
electrostatics, or static electricity.

Click to view content (https://openstax.org/books/college-physics-2e/pages/18-introduction-to-electric-charge-
and-electric-field)

Access for free at openstax.org

18.1 • Static Electricity and Charge: Conservation of Charge

775

18.1 Static Electricity and Charge: Conservation of Charge

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

• Define electric charge, and describe how the two types of charge interact.
• Describe three common situations that generate static electricity.
• State the law of conservation of charge.

FIGURE 18.3 Borneo amber was mined in Sabah, Malaysia, from shale-sandstone-mudstone veins. When a piece of amber is rubbed with a
piece of silk, the amber gains more electrons, giving it a net negative charge. At the same time, the silk, having lost electrons, becomes
positively charged. (credit: Sebakoamber, Wikimedia Commons)

What makes plastic wrap cling? Static electricity. Not only are applications of static electricity common these days,
its existence has been known since ancient times. The first record of its effects dates to ancient Greeks who noted
more than 500 years B.C. that polishing amber temporarily enabled it to attract bits of straw (see Figure 18.3). The
very word electricderives from the Greek word for amber (electron).

Many of the characteristics of static electricity can be explored by rubbing things together. Rubbing creates the
spark you get from walking across a wool carpet, for example. Static cling generated in a clothes dryer and the
attraction of straw to recently polished amber also result from rubbing. Similarly, lightning results from air
movements under certain weather conditions. You can also rub a balloon on your hair, and the static electricity
created can then make the balloon cling to a wall. We also have to be cautious of static electricity, especially in dry
climates. When we pump gasoline, we are warned to discharge ourselves (after sliding across the seat) on a metal
surface before grabbing the gas nozzle. Attendants in hospital operating rooms must wear booties with a conductive
strip of aluminum foil on the bottoms to avoid creating sparks which may ignite flammable anesthesia gases
combined with the oxygen being used.

Some of the most basic characteristics of static electricity include:

• The effects of static electricity are explained by a physical quantity not previously introduced, called electric

charge.

• There are only two types of charge, one called positive and the other called negative.
• Like charges repel, whereas unlike charges attract.
• The force between charges decreases with distance.

How do we know there are two types of electric charge? When various materials are rubbed together in controlled
ways, certain combinations of materials always produce one type of charge on one material and the opposite type
on the other. By convention, we call one type of charge “positive”, and the other type “negative.” For example, when
glass is rubbed with silk, the glass becomes positively charged and the silk negatively charged. Since the glass and
silk have opposite charges, they attract one another like clothes that have rubbed together in a dryer. Two glass rods
rubbed with silk in this manner will repel one another, since each rod has positive charge on it. Similarly, two silk
cloths so rubbed will repel, since both cloths have negative charge. Figure 18.4 shows how these simple materials
can be used to explore the nature of the force between charges.

776

18 • Electric Charge and Electric Field

FIGURE 18.4 A glass rod becomes positively charged when rubbed with silk, while the silk becomes negatively charged. (a) The glass rod is
attracted to the silk because their charges are opposite. (b) Two similarly charged glass rods repel. (c) Two similarly charged silk cloths
repel.

More sophisticated questions arise. Where do these charges come from? Can you create or destroy charge? Is there
a smallest unit of charge? Exactly how does the force depend on the amount of charge and the distance between
charges? Such questions obviously occurred to Benjamin Franklin and other early researchers, and they interest us
even today.

Charge Carried by Electrons and Protons

Franklin wrote in his letters and books that he could see the effects of electric charge but did not understand what
caused the phenomenon. Today we have the advantage of knowing that normal matter is made of atoms, and that
atoms contain positive and negative charges, usually in equal amounts.

Figure 18.5 shows a simple model of an atom with negative electrons orbiting its positive nucleus. The nucleus is
positive due to the presence of positively charged protons. Nearly all charge in nature is due to electrons and
protons, which are two of the three building blocks of most matter. (The third is the neutron, which is neutral,
carrying no charge.) Other charge-carrying particles are observed in cosmic rays and nuclear decay, and are created
in particle accelerators. All but the electron and proton survive only a short time and are quite rare by comparison.

FIGURE 18.5 This simplified (and not to scale) view of an atom is called the planetary model of the atom. Negative electrons orbit a much
heavier positive nucleus, as the planets orbit the much heavier sun. There the similarity ends, because forces in the atom are
electromagnetic, whereas those in the planetary system are gravitational. Normal macroscopic amounts of matter contain immense
numbers of atoms and molecules and, hence, even greater numbers of individual negative and positive charges.

The charges of electrons and protons are identical in magnitude but opposite in sign. Furthermore, all charged
objects in nature are integral multiples of this basic quantity of charge, meaning that all charges are made of
combinations of a basic unit of charge. Usually, charges are formed by combinations of electrons and protons. The
magnitude of this basic charge is

18.1

The symbol

is commonly used for charge and the subscript

indicates the charge of a single electron (or proton).

The SI unit of charge is the coulomb (C). The number of protons needed to make a charge of 1.00 C is

Access for free at openstax.org

18.1 • Static Electricity and Charge: Conservation of Charge

777

18.2

Similarly,
element (an atom), there is a smallest bit of charge. There is no directly observed charge smaller than
Things Great and Small: The Submicroscopic Origin of Charge), and all observed charges are integral multiples of

electrons have a combined charge of −1.00 coulomb. Just as there is a smallest bit of an
(see

.

Things Great and Small: The Submicroscopic Origin of Charge

With the exception of exotic, short-lived particles, all charge in nature is carried by electrons and protons.
Electrons carry the charge we have named negative. Protons carry an equal-magnitude charge that we call
positive. (See Figure 18.6.) Electron and proton charges are considered fundamental building blocks, since all
other charges are integral multiples of those carried by electrons and protons. Electrons and protons are also
two of the three fundamental building blocks of ordinary matter. The neutron is the third and has zero total
charge.

Figure 18.6 shows a person touching a Van de Graaff generator and receiving excess positive charge. The expanded
view of a hair shows the existence of both types of charges but an excess of positive. The repulsion of these positive
like charges causes the strands of hair to repel other strands of hair and to stand up. The further blowup shows an
artist’s conception of an electron and a proton perhaps found in an atom in a strand of hair.

FIGURE 18.6 When this person touches a Van de Graaff generator, some electrons are attracted to the generator, resulting in an excess of
positive charge, causing her hair to stand on end. The charges in one hair are shown. An artist’s conception of an electron and a proton
illustrate the particles carrying the negative and positive charges. We cannot really see these particles with visible light because they are so
small (the electron seems to be an infinitesimal point), but we know a great deal about their measurable properties, such as the charges
they carry.

The electron seems to have no substructure; in contrast, when the substructure of protons is explored by scattering
extremely energetic electrons from them, it appears that there are point-like particles inside the proton. These sub-
particles, named quarks, have never been directly observed, but they are believed to carry fractional charges as
seen in Figure 18.7. Charges on electrons and protons and all other directly observable particles are unitary, but
or
these quark substructures carry charges of either

. There are continuing attempts to observe fractional

charge directly and to learn of the properties of quarks, which are perhaps the ultimate substructure of matter.

778

18 • Electric Charge and Electric Field

FIGURE 18.7 Artist’s conception of fractional quark charges inside a proton. A group of three quark charges add up to the single positive
charge on the proton:

.

Separation of Charge in Atoms

Charges in atoms and molecules can be separated—for example, by rubbing materials together. Some atoms and
molecules have a greater affinity for electrons than others and will become negatively charged by close contact in
rubbing, leaving the other material positively charged. (See Figure 18.8.) Positive charge can similarly be induced by
rubbing. Methods other than rubbing can also separate charges. Batteries, for example, use combinations of
substances that interact in such a way as to separate charges. Chemical interactions may transfer negative charge
from one substance to the other, making one battery terminal negative and leaving the first one positive.

FIGURE 18.8 When materials are rubbed together, charges can be separated, particularly if one material has a greater affinity for electrons
than another. (a) Both the amber and cloth are originally neutral, with equal positive and negative charges. Only a tiny fraction of the
charges are involved, and only a few of them are shown here. (b) When rubbed together, some negative charge is transferred to the amber,
leaving the cloth with a net positive charge. (c) When separated, the amber and cloth now have net charges, but the absolute value of the
net positive and negative charges will be equal.

No charge is actually created or destroyed when charges are separated as we have been discussing. Rather, existing
charges are moved about. In fact, in all situations the total amount of charge is always constant. This universally
obeyed law of nature is called the law of conservation of charge.

Law of Conservation of Charge

Total charge is constant in any process.

In more exotic situations, such as in particle accelerators, mass,

, can be created from energy in the amount

. Sometimes, the created mass is charged, such as when an electron is created. Whenever a charged

particle is created, another having an opposite charge is always created along with it, so that the total charge
created is zero. Usually, the two particles are “matter-antimatter” counterparts. For example, an antielectron would
usually be created at the same time as an electron. The antielectron has a positive charge (it is called a positron),
and so the total charge created is zero. (See Figure 18.9.) All particles have antimatter counterparts with opposite
signs. When matter and antimatter counterparts are brought together, they completely annihilate one another. By

Access for free at openstax.org

18.1 • Static Electricity and Charge: Conservation of Charge

779

annihilate, we mean that the mass of the two particles is converted to energy E, again obeying the relationship
. Since the two particles have equal and opposite charge, the total charge is zero before and after the

annihilation; thus, total charge is conserved.

Making Connections: Conservation Laws

Only a limited number of physical quantities are universally conserved. Charge is one—energy, momentum, and
angular momentum are others. Because they are conserved, these physical quantities are used to explain more
phenomena and form more connections than other, less basic quantities. We find that conserved quantities give
us great insight into the rules followed by nature and hints to the organization of nature. Discoveries of
conservation laws have led to further discoveries, such as the weak nuclear force and the quark substructure of
protons and other particles.

FIGURE 18.9 (a) When enough energy is present, it can be converted into matter. Here the matter created is an electron–antielectron pair. (
is the electron’s mass.) The total charge before and after this event is zero. (b) When matter and antimatter collide, they annihilate each

other; the total charge is conserved at zero before and after the annihilation.

The law of conservation of charge is absolute—it has never been observed to be violated. Charge, then, is a special
physical quantity, joining a very short list of other quantities in nature that are always conserved. Other conserved
quantities include energy, momentum, and angular momentum.

PHET EXPLORATIONS

Balloons and Static Electricity
Why does a balloon stick to your sweater? Rub a balloon on a sweater, then let go of the balloon and it flies over and
sticks to the sweater. View the charges in the sweater, balloons, and the wall.

Click to view content (https://openstax.org/books/college-physics-2e/pages/18-1-static-electricity-and-charge-
conservation-of-charge)

780

18 • Electric Charge and Electric Field

18.2 Conductors and Insulators

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

• Define conductor and insulator, explain the difference, and give examples of each.
• Describe three methods for charging an object.
• Explain what happens to an electric force as you move farther from the source.
• Define polarization.

FIGURE 18.10 This power adapter uses metal wires and connectors to conduct electricity from the wall socket to a laptop computer. The
conducting wires allow electrons to move freely through the cables, which are shielded by rubber and plastic. These materials act as
insulators that don’t allow electric charge to escape outward. (credit: Evan-Amos, Wikimedia Commons)

Some substances, such as metals and salty water, allow charges to move through them with relative ease. Some of
the electrons in metals and similar conductors are not bound to individual atoms or sites in the material. These free
electrons can move through the material much as air moves through loose sand. Any substance that has free
electrons and allows charge to move relatively freely through it is called a conductor. The moving electrons may
collide with fixed atoms and molecules, losing some energy, but they can move in a conductor. Superconductors
allow the movement of charge without any loss of energy. Salty water and other similar conducting materials contain
free ions that can move through them. An ion is an atom or molecule having a positive or negative (nonzero) total
charge. In other words, the total number of electrons is not equal to the total number of protons.

Other substances, such as glass, do not allow charges to move through them. These are called insulators. Electrons
and ions in insulators are bound in the structure and cannot move easily—as much as
in conductors. Pure water and dry table salt are insulators, for example, whereas molten salt and salty water are
conductors.

times more slowly than

FIGURE 18.11 An electroscope is a favorite instrument in physics demonstrations and student laboratories. It is typically made with gold
foil leaves hung from a (conducting) metal stem and is insulated from the room air in a glass-walled container. (a) A positively charged glass
rod is brought near the tip of the electroscope, attracting electrons to the top and leaving a net positive charge on the leaves. Like charges in
the light flexible gold leaves repel, separating them. (b) When the rod is touched against the ball, electrons are attracted and transferred,
reducing the net charge on the glass rod but leaving the electroscope positively charged. (c) The excess charges are evenly distributed in
the stem and leaves of the electroscope once the glass rod is removed.

Charging by Contact

Figure 18.11 shows an electroscope being charged by touching it with a positively charged glass rod. Because the
glass rod is an insulator, it must actually touch the electroscope to transfer charge to or from it. (Note that the extra
positive charges reside on the surface of the glass rod as a result of rubbing it with silk before starting the

Access for free at openstax.org

18.2 • Conductors and Insulators

781

experiment.) Since only electrons move in metals, we see that they are attracted to the top of the electroscope.
There, some are transferred to the positive rod by touch, leaving the electroscope with a net positive charge.

Electrostatic repulsion in the leaves of the charged electroscope separates them. The electrostatic force has a
horizontal component that results in the leaves moving apart as well as a vertical component that is balanced by the
gravitational force. Similarly, the electroscope can be negatively charged by contact with a negatively charged
object.

Charging by Induction

It is not necessary to transfer excess charge directly to an object in order to charge it. Figure 18.12 shows a method
of induction wherein a charge is created in a nearby object, without direct contact. Here we see two neutral metal
spheres in contact with one another but insulated from the rest of the world. A positively charged rod is brought
near one of them, attracting negative charge to that side, leaving the other sphere positively charged.

This is an example of induced polarization of neutral objects. Polarization is the separation of charges in an object
that remains neutral. If the spheres are now separated (before the rod is pulled away), each sphere will have a net
charge. Note that the object closest to the charged rod receives an opposite charge when charged by induction. Note
also that no charge is removed from the charged rod, so that this process can be repeated without depleting the
supply of excess charge.

Another method of charging by induction is shown in Figure 18.13. The neutral metal sphere is polarized when a
charged rod is brought near it. The sphere is then grounded, meaning that a conducting wire is run from the sphere
to the ground. Since the earth is large and most ground is a good conductor, it can supply or accept excess charge
easily. In this case, electrons are attracted to the sphere through a wire called the ground wire, because it supplies a
conducting path to the ground. The ground connection is broken before the charged rod is removed, leaving the
sphere with an excess charge opposite to that of the rod. Again, an opposite charge is achieved when charging by
induction and the charged rod loses none of its excess charge.

FIGURE 18.12 Charging by induction. (a) Two uncharged or neutral metal spheres are in contact with each other but insulated from the rest
of the world. (b) A positively charged glass rod is brought near the sphere on the left, attracting negative charge and leaving the other

782

18 • Electric Charge and Electric Field

sphere positively charged. (c) The spheres are separated before the rod is removed, thus separating negative and positive charge. (d) The
spheres retain net charges after the inducing rod is removed—without ever having been touched by a charged object.

FIGURE 18.13 Charging by induction, using a ground connection. (a) A positively charged rod is brought near a neutral metal sphere,
polarizing it. (b) The sphere is grounded, allowing electrons to be attracted from the earth’s ample supply. (c) The ground connection is
broken. (d) The positive rod is removed, leaving the sphere with an induced negative charge.

FIGURE 18.14 Both positive and negative objects attract a neutral object by polarizing its molecules. (a) A positive object brought near a
neutral insulator polarizes its molecules. There is a slight shift in the distribution of the electrons orbiting the molecule, with unlike charges
being brought nearer and like charges moved away. Since the electrostatic force decreases with distance, there is a net attraction. (b) A
negative object produces the opposite polarization, but again attracts the neutral object. (c) The same effect occurs for a conductor; since
the unlike charges are closer, there is a net attraction.

Neutral objects can be attracted to any charged object. The pieces of straw attracted to polished amber are neutral,
for example. If you run a plastic comb through your hair, the charged comb can pick up neutral pieces of paper.
Figure 18.14 shows how the polarization of atoms and molecules in neutral objects results in their attraction to a
charged object.

When a charged rod is brought near a neutral substance, an insulator in this case, the distribution of charge in atoms
and molecules is shifted slightly. Opposite charge is attracted nearer the external charged rod, while like charge is
repelled. Since the electrostatic force decreases with distance, the repulsion of like charges is weaker than the
attraction of unlike charges, and so there is a net attraction. Thus a positively charged glass rod attracts neutral
pieces of paper, as will a negatively charged rubber rod. Some molecules, like water, are polar molecules. Polar
molecules have a natural or inherent separation of charge, although they are neutral overall. Polar molecules are
particularly affected by other charged objects and show greater polarization effects than molecules with naturally
uniform charge distributions.

Access for free at openstax.org

CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING

Can you explain the attraction of water to the charged rod in the figure below?

18.3 • Coulomb’s Law

783

FIGURE 18.15

Solution
Water molecules are polarized, giving them slightly positive and slightly negative sides. This makes water even more
susceptible to a charged rod’s attraction. In addition, tap water contains dissolved ions (positive and negative
charges). As the water flows downward, due to the force of gravity, the charged conductor exerts a net attraction to
the opposite charges in the stream of water, pulling it closer.

PHET EXPLORATIONS

John Travoltage
Make sparks fly with John Travoltage. Wiggle Johnnie's foot and he picks up charges from the carpet. Bring his hand
close to the door knob and get rid of the excess charge.

Click to view content (https://openstax.org/books/college-physics-2e/pages/18-2-conductors-and-insulators)

18.3 Coulomb’s Law

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

• State Coulomb’s law in terms of how the electrostatic force changes with the distance between two

objects.

• Calculate the electrostatic force between two charged point forces, such as electrons or protons.
• Compare the electrostatic force to the gravitational attraction for a proton and an electron; for a human

and the Earth.

784

18 • Electric Charge and Electric Field

FIGURE 18.16 This NASA image of Arp 87 shows the result of a strong gravitational attraction between two galaxies. In contrast, at the
subatomic level, the electrostatic attraction between two objects, such as an electron and a proton, is far greater than their mutual
attraction due to gravity. (credit: NASA/HST)

Through the work of scientists in the late 18th century, the main features of the electrostatic force—the existence
of two types of charge, the observation that like charges repel, unlike charges attract, and the decrease of force with
distance—were eventually refined, and expressed as a mathematical formula. The mathematical formula for the
electrostatic force is called Coulomb’s law after the French physicist Charles Coulomb (1736–1806), who
performed experiments and first proposed a formula to calculate it.

Coulomb’s Law

Coulomb’s law calculates the magnitude of the force
distance . In SI units, the constant

is equal to

between two point charges,

and

, separated by a

18.3

The electrostatic force is a vector quantity and is expressed in units of newtons. The force is understood to be
along the line joining the two charges. (See Figure 18.17.)

18.4

Although the formula for Coulomb’s law is simple, it was no mean task to prove it. The experiments Coulomb did,
with the primitive equipment then available, were difficult. Modern experiments have verified Coulomb’s law to
great precision. For example, it has been shown that the force is inversely proportional to distance between two
objects squared

. No exceptions have ever been found, even at the small

to an accuracy of 1 part in

distances within the atom.

FIGURE 18.17 The magnitude of the electrostatic force
law. Note that Newton’s third law (every force exerted creates an equal and opposite force) applies as usual—the force on
magnitude and opposite in direction to the force it exerts on

. (a) Like charges. (b) Unlike charges.

between point charges

and

separated by a distance is given by Coulomb’s

is equal in

EXAMPLE 18.1

How Strong is the Coulomb Force Relative to the Gravitational Force?
Compare the electrostatic force between an electron and proton separated by
gravitational force between them. This distance is their average separation in a hydrogen atom.

with the

Access for free at openstax.org

18.3 • Coulomb’s Law

785

Strategy

To compare the two forces, we first compute the electrostatic force using Coulomb’s law,

. We then

calculate the gravitational force using Newton’s universal law of gravitation. Finally, we take a ratio to see how the
forces compare in magnitude.

Solution

Entering the given and known information about the charges and separation of the electron and proton into the
expression of Coulomb’s law yields

Thus the Coulomb force is

18.5

18.6

18.7

The charges are opposite in sign, so this is an attractive force. This is a very large force for an electron—it would
cause an acceleration of
is given by Newton’s law of gravitation as:

(verification is left as an end-of-section problem).The gravitational force

18.8

where
found in the appendices. Entering values for the knowns yields

. Here

and

represent the electron and proton masses, which can be

This is also an attractive force, although it is traditionally shown as positive since gravitational force is always
attractive. The ratio of the magnitude of the electrostatic force to gravitational force in this case is, thus,

18.9

18.10

Discussion

This is a remarkably large ratio! Note that this will be the ratio of electrostatic force to gravitational force for an
electron and a proton at any distance (taking the ratio before entering numerical values shows that the distance
cancels). This ratio gives some indication of just how much larger the Coulomb force is than the gravitational force
between two of the most common particles in nature.

As the example implies, gravitational force is completely negligible on a small scale, where the interactions of
individual charged particles are important. On a large scale, such as between the Earth and a person, the reverse is
true. Most objects are nearly electrically neutral, and so attractive and repulsive Coulomb forces nearly cancel.
Gravitational force on a large scale dominates interactions between large objects because it is always attractive,
while Coulomb forces tend to cancel.

786

18 • Electric Charge and Electric Field

18.4 Electric Field: Concept of a Field Revisited

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

• Describe a force field and calculate the strength of an electric field due to a point charge.
• Calculate the force exerted on a test charge by an electric field.
• Explain the relationship between electrical force (F) on a test charge and electrical field strength (E).

Contact forces, such as between a baseball and a bat, are explained on the small scale by the interaction of the
charges in atoms and molecules in close proximity. They interact through forces that include the Coulomb force.
Action at a distance is a force between objects that are not close enough for their atoms to “touch.” That is, they are
separated by more than a few atomic diameters.

For example, a charged rubber comb attracts neutral bits of paper from a distance via the Coulomb force. It is very
useful to think of an object being surrounded in space by a force field. The force field carries the force to another
object (called a test object) some distance away.

Concept of a Field

A field is a way of conceptualizing and mapping the force that surrounds any object and acts on another object at a
distance without apparent physical connection. For example, the gravitational field surrounding the earth (and all
other masses) represents the gravitational force that would be experienced if another mass were placed at a given
point within the field.

In the same way, the Coulomb force field surrounding any charge extends throughout space. Using Coulomb’s law,

, its magnitude is given by the equation

, for a point charge (a particle having a
) acting on a test charge at a distance (see Figure 18.18). Both the magnitude and direction of the

charge
Coulomb force field depend on

and the test charge .

FIGURE 18.18 The Coulomb force field due to a positive charge
distance from . (a) Since

is positive, the force

is shown acting on two different charges. Both charges are the same

acting on it is repulsive. (b) The charge

is negative and greater in magnitude than

, and so the force

because it depends on the test charges

acting on it is attractive and stronger than
and

as well as the charge

.

. The Coulomb force field is thus not unique at any point in space,

To simplify things, we would prefer to have a field that depends only on
and not on the test charge . The electric
field is defined in such a manner that it represents only the charge creating it and is unique at every point in space.
Specifically, the electric field

is defined to be the ratio of the Coulomb force to the test charge:

18.11

is the electrostatic force (or Coulomb force) exerted on a positive test charge . It is understood that

where
is so small that it does not alter the charge distribution creating
the same direction as . It is also assumed that
the electric field. The units of electric field are newtons per coulomb (N/C). If the electric field is known, then the
electrostatic force on any charge is simply obtained by multiplying charge times electric field, or
the electric field due to a point charge

. According to Coulomb’s law, the force it exerts on a test charge is

. Consider

is in

Access for free at openstax.org

18.4 • Electric Field: Concept of a Field Revisited

787

. Thus the magnitude of the electric field,

, for a point charge is

Since the test charge cancels, we see that

18.12

18.13

The electric field is thus seen to depend only on the charge
test charge .

and the distance ; it is completely independent of the

EXAMPLE 18.2

Calculating the Electric Field of a Point Charge
Calculate the strength and direction of the electric field
distance of 5.00 mm from the charge.

due to a point charge of 2.00 nC (nano-Coulombs) at a

Strategy

We can find the electric field created by a point charge by using the equation

.

Solution

Here

Discussion

C and

m. Entering those values into the above equation gives

18.14

This electric field strength is the same at any point 5.00 mm away from the charge
positive, meaning that it has a direction pointing away from the charge

.

that creates the field. It is

EXAMPLE 18.3

Calculating the Force Exerted on a Point Charge by an Electric Field
What force does the electric field found in the previous example exert on a point charge of

?

Strategy

Since we know the electric field strength and the charge in the field, the force on that charge can be calculated using
the definition of electric field

rearranged to

.

Solution

The magnitude of the force on a charge

exerted by a field of strength

N/C is thus,

18.15

Because is negative, the force is directed opposite to the direction of the field.

788

18 • Electric Charge and Electric Field

Discussion

The force is attractive, as expected for unlike charges. (The field was created by a positive charge and here acts on a
negative charge.) The charges in this example are typical of common static electricity, and the modest attractive
force obtained is similar to forces experienced in static cling and similar situations.

PHET EXPLORATIONS

Electric Field of Dreams
Play ball! Add charges to the Field of Dreams and see how they react to the electric field. Turn on a background
electric field and adjust the direction and magnitude.

Click to view content (https://openstax.org/l/02electric_field_dreams).

18.5 Electric Field Lines: Multiple Charges

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

• Calculate the total force (magnitude and direction) exerted on a test charge from more than one charge
• Describe an electric field diagram of a positive point charge; of a negative point charge with twice the

magnitude of positive charge

• Draw the electric field lines between two points of the same charge; between two points of opposite

charge.

Drawings using lines to represent electric fields around charged objects are very useful in visualizing field strength
and direction. Since the electric field has both magnitude and direction, it is a vector. Like all vectors, the electric
field can be represented by an arrow that has length proportional to its magnitude and that points in the correct
direction. (We have used arrows extensively to represent force vectors, for example.)

Figure 18.19 shows two pictorial representations of the same electric field created by a positive point charge
Figure 18.19 (b) shows the standard representation using continuous lines. Figure 18.19 (a) shows numerous
individual arrows with each arrow representing the force on a test charge . Field lines are essentially a map of
infinitesimal force vectors.

.

FIGURE 18.19 Two equivalent representations of the electric field due to a positive charge
magnitude and direction. (b) In the standard representation, the arrows are replaced by continuous field lines having the same direction at
any point as the electric field. The closeness of the lines is directly related to the strength of the electric field. A test charge placed
anywhere will feel a force in the direction of the field line; this force will have a strength proportional to the density of the lines (being
greater near the charge, for example).

. (a) Arrows representing the electric field’s

Note that the electric field is defined for a positive test charge , so that the field lines point away from a positive
charge and toward a negative charge. (See Figure 18.20.) The electric field strength is exactly proportional to the
number of field lines per unit area, since the magnitude of the electric field for a point charge is
and
area is proportional to
closeness (that is, their areal density or the number of lines crossing a unit area) represents strength, is used for all
fields: electrostatic, gravitational, magnetic, and others.

. This pictorial representation, in which field lines represent the direction and their

Access for free at openstax.org

18.5 • Electric Field Lines: Multiple Charges

789

FIGURE 18.20 The electric field surrounding three different point charges. (a) A positive charge. (b) A negative charge of equal magnitude.
(c) A larger negative charge.

In many situations, there are multiple charges. The total electric field created by multiple charges is the vector sum
of the individual fields created by each charge. The following example shows how to add electric field vectors.

EXAMPLE 18.4

Adding Electric Fields
Find the magnitude and direction of the total electric field due to the two point charges,
the coordinate system as shown in Figure 18.21.

and

, at the origin of

Strategy

FIGURE 18.21 The electric fields

and

at the origin O add to

.

Since the electric field is a vector (having magnitude and direction), we add electric fields with the same vector
techniques used for other types of vectors. We first must find the electric field due to each charge at the point of
interest, which is the origin of the coordinate system (O) in this instance. We pretend that there is a positive test
charge,
found, the total field can be determined using vector addition.

, at point O, which allows us to determine the direction of the fields

. Once those fields are

and

Solution

The electric field strength at the origin due to

is labeled

and is calculated:

Similarly,

is

18.16

18.17

Four digits have been retained in this solution to illustrate that

is exactly twice the magnitude of

. Now arrows

790

18 • Electric Charge and Electric Field

are drawn to represent the magnitudes and directions of
. (See Figure 18.21.) The direction of the electric
field is that of the force on a positive charge so both arrows point directly away from the positive charges that create
them. The arrow for
can be added using the Pythagorean theorem. The magnitude of the total field

. The arrows form a right triangle in this case and

is exactly twice the length of that for

and

is

The direction is

or

above the x-axis.

Discussion

18.18

18.19

In cases where the electric field vectors to be added are not perpendicular, vector components or graphical
techniques can be used. The total electric field found in this example is the total electric field at only one point in
space. To find the total electric field due to these two charges over an entire region, the same technique must be
repeated for each point in the region. This impossibly lengthy task (there are an infinite number of points in space)
can be avoided by calculating the total field at representative points and using some of the unifying features noted
next.

Figure 18.22 shows how the electric field from two point charges can be drawn by finding the total field at
representative points and drawing electric field lines consistent with those points. While the electric fields from
multiple charges are more complex than those of single charges, some simple features are easily noticed.

For example, the field is weaker between like charges, as shown by the lines being farther apart in that region. (This
is because the fields from each charge exert opposing forces on any charge placed between them.) (See Figure
18.22 and Figure 18.23(a).) Furthermore, at a great distance from two like charges, the field becomes identical to
the field from a single, larger charge.

Figure 18.23(b) shows the electric field of two unlike charges. The field is stronger between the charges. In that
region, the fields from each charge are in the same direction, and so their strengths add. The field of two unlike
charges is weak at large distances, because the fields of the individual charges are in opposite directions and so
their strengths subtract. At very large distances, the field of two unlike charges looks like that of a smaller single
charge.

Access for free at openstax.org

18.5 • Electric Field Lines: Multiple Charges

791

FIGURE 18.22 Two positive point charges
points and then smooth field lines drawn following the rules outlined in the text.

and

produce the resultant electric field shown. The field is calculated at representative

FIGURE 18.23 (a) Two negative charges produce the fields shown. It is very similar to the field produced by two positive charges, except
that the directions are reversed. The field is clearly weaker between the charges. The individual forces on a test charge in that region are in
opposite directions. (b) Two opposite charges produce the field shown, which is stronger in the region between the charges.

We use electric field lines to visualize and analyze electric fields (the lines are a pictorial tool, not a physical entity in
themselves). The properties of electric field lines for any charge distribution can be summarized as follows:

1. Field lines must begin on positive charges and terminate on negative charges, or at infinity in the hypothetical

case of isolated charges.

2. The number of field lines leaving a positive charge or entering a negative charge is proportional to the

magnitude of the charge.

3. The strength of the field is proportional to the closeness of the field lines—more precisely, it is proportional to

the number of lines per unit area perpendicular to the lines.

4. The direction of the electric field is tangent to the field line at any point in space.
5. Field lines can never cross.

The last property means that the field is unique at any point. The field line represents the direction of the field; so if
they crossed, the field would have two directions at that location (an impossibility if the field is unique).

792

18 • Electric Charge and Electric Field

PHET EXPLORATIONS

Charges and Fields
Move point charges around on the playing field and then view the electric field, voltages, equipotential lines, and
more. It's colorful, it's dynamic, it's free.

Click to view content (https://openstax.org/books/college-physics-2e/pages/18-5-electric-field-lines-multiple-
charges)

18.6 Electric Forces in Biology

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe how a water molecule is polar.
• Explain electrostatic screening by a water molecule within a living cell.

Classical electrostatics has an important role to play in modern molecular biology. Large molecules such as proteins,
nucleic acids, and so on—so important to life—are usually electrically charged. DNA itself is highly charged; it is the
electrostatic force that not only holds the molecule together but gives the molecule structure and strength. Figure
18.24 is a schematic of the DNA double helix.

FIGURE 18.24 DNA is a highly charged molecule. The DNA double helix shows the two coiled strands each containing a row of nitrogenous
bases, which “code” the genetic information needed by a living organism. The strands are connected by bonds between pairs of bases.
While pairing combinations between certain bases are fixed (C-G and A-T), the sequence of nucleotides in the strand varies. (credit: Jerome
Walker)

The four nucleotide bases are given the symbols A (adenine), C (cytosine), G (guanine), and T (thymine). The order of
the four bases varies in each strand, but the pairing between bases is always the same. C and G are always paired
and A and T are always paired, which helps to preserve the order of bases in cell division (mitosis) so as to pass on
the correct genetic information. Since the Coulomb force drops with distance (
base pairs must be small enough that the electrostatic force is sufficient to hold them together.

), the distances between the

DNA is a highly charged molecule, with about
the two strands that make up the DNA structure is about 1 nm, while the distance separating the individual atoms
within each base is about 0.3 nm.

(fundamental charge) per

m. The distance separating

One might wonder why electrostatic forces do not play a larger role in biology than they do if we have so many
charged molecules. The reason is that the electrostatic force is “diluted” due to screening between molecules. This
is due to the presence of other charges in the cell.

Polarity of Water Molecules

The best example of this charge screening is the water molecule, represented as
molecule. Its 10 electrons (8 from the oxygen atom and 2 from the two hydrogen atoms) tend to remain closer to
the oxygen nucleus than the hydrogen nuclei. This creates two centers of equal and opposite charges—what is called
a dipole, as illustrated in Figure 18.25. The magnitude of the dipole is called the dipole moment.

. Water is a strongly polar

These two centers of charge will terminate some of the electric field lines coming from a free charge, as on a DNA
molecule. This results in a reduction in the strength of the Coulomb interaction. One might say that screening
makes the Coulomb force a short range force rather than long range.

Access for free at openstax.org

18.7 • Conductors and Electric Fields in Static Equilibrium

793

Cell Membranes
Other ions of importance in biology that can reduce or screen Coulomb interactions are
These ions are located both inside and outside of living cells. The movement of these ions through cell membranes
is crucial to the motion of nerve impulses through nerve axons.

and

and

.

Recent studies of electrostatics in biology seem to show that electric fields in cells can be extended over larger
distances, in spite of screening, by “microtubules” within the cell. These microtubules are hollow tubes composed
of proteins that guide the movement of chromosomes when cells divide, the motion of other organisms within the
cell, and provide mechanisms for motion of some cells (as motors).

FIGURE 18.25 This schematic shows water (
(H) atoms leads to a net separation of positive and negative charge—forming a dipole. The symbols
of the
charges between molecules.

) as a polar molecule. Unequal sharing of electrons between the oxygen (O) and hydrogen
indicate that the oxygen side

molecule tends to be more negative, while the hydrogen ends tend to be more positive. This leads to an attraction of opposite

and

You are likely familiar with the role of electrical signals in nerve conduction and the importance of charges in cardiac
and related activity. Changes in electrical properties are also essential in core biological processes. Ernest Everett
Just, whose expertise in understanding and handling egg cells led to a number of critical experimental discoveries,
investigated the role of the cell membrane in reproductive fertilization. In one key experiment, Just established that
the egg membrane undergoes a depolarizing "wave of negativity" the moment it fuses with a sperm cell. This change
in charge is now known as the "fast block" that ensures that only one sperm cell fuses with an egg cell and is critical
for embryonic development.

Bioelectricity and Wound Healing
Just as electrical forces drive activities in healthy cells and systems, they are also critical in damaged ones.
Scientists have long known that injuries or infections are managed by the body through various responses, including
increased white blood cell concentrations, swelling, and tissue repair. For example, human cells damaged by
wounds heal through a complex process. But what triggers it?

Physicists and biologists working together at Vanderbilt University used an ultra-precise laser to uncover the
processes organisms use to repair damage. Lead researchers Andrea Page-Degraw and Shane Hutson and study
author Erica Shannon discovered that immediately upon damage, cells release calcium ions and eventually other
molecules, driving an electrochemical response that initiates the healing process. Shannon notes that different
types of damage lead to different chemical releases, demonstrating how organisms may initiate specific responses
to best address the injury.

While far more research is required to understand the triggering and response method, other research indicates that
bioelectricity is highly involved in wound healing. Several studies have indicated that precise and low-level electrical
stimulation of wounds (such as those from surgeries) leads to faster healing. While the mechanisms are not fully
understood, electrical stimulation is a growing area of research and practice in medicine.

18.7 Conductors and Electric Fields in Static Equilibrium

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

• List the three properties of a conductor in electrostatic equilibrium.
• Explain the effect of an electric field on free charges in a conductor.
• Explain why no electric field may exist inside a conductor.
• Describe the electric field surrounding Earth.
• Explain what happens to an electric field applied to an irregular conductor.
• Describe how a lightning rod works.
• Explain how a metal car may protect passengers inside from the dangerous electric fields caused by a

downed line touching the car.

794

18 • Electric Charge and Electric Field

Conductors contain free charges that move easily. When excess charge is placed on a conductor or the conductor is
put into a static electric field, charges in the conductor quickly respond to reach a steady state called electrostatic
equilibrium.

Figure 18.26 shows the effect of an electric field on free charges in a conductor. The free charges move until the
field is perpendicular to the conductor’s surface. There can be no component of the field parallel to the surface in
electrostatic equilibrium, since, if there were, it would produce further movement of charge. A positive free charge is
shown, but free charges can be either positive or negative and are, in fact, negative in metals. The motion of a
positive charge is equivalent to the motion of a negative charge in the opposite direction.

FIGURE 18.26 When an electric field
the surface. (a) The electric field is a vector quantity, with both parallel and perpendicular components. The parallel component (
a force (
charge has been brought to the conductor’s surface, leaving electrostatic forces in equilibrium.

) on the free charge , which moves the charge until

is applied to a conductor, free charges inside the conductor move until the field is perpendicular to

. (b) The resulting field is perpendicular to the surface. The free

) exerts

A conductor placed in an electric field will be polarized. Figure 18.27 shows the result of placing a neutral
conductor in an originally uniform electric field. The field becomes stronger near the conductor but entirely
disappears inside it.

FIGURE 18.27 This illustration shows a spherical conductor in static equilibrium with an originally uniform electric field. Free charges move
within the conductor, polarizing it, until the electric field lines are perpendicular to the surface. The field lines end on excess negative
charge on one section of the surface and begin again on excess positive charge on the opposite side. No electric field exists inside the
conductor, since free charges in the conductor would continue moving in response to any field until it was neutralized.

Misconception Alert: Electric Field inside a Conductor

Excess charges placed on a spherical conductor repel and move until they are evenly distributed, as shown in
Figure 18.28. Excess charge is forced to the surface until the field inside the conductor is zero. Outside the
conductor, the field is exactly the same as if the conductor were replaced by a point charge at its center equal to
the excess charge.

Access for free at openstax.org

18.7 • Conductors and Electric Fields in Static Equilibrium

795

FIGURE 18.28 The mutual repulsion of excess positive charges on a spherical conductor distributes them uniformly on its surface. The
resulting electric field is perpendicular to the surface and zero inside. Outside the conductor, the field is identical to that of a point
charge at the center equal to the excess charge.

Properties of a Conductor in Electrostatic Equilibrium

1. The electric field is zero inside a conductor.
2. Just outside a conductor, the electric field lines are perpendicular to its surface, ending or beginning on

charges on the surface.

3. Any excess charge resides entirely on the surface or surfaces of a conductor.

The properties of a conductor are consistent with the situations already discussed and can be used to analyze any
conductor in electrostatic equilibrium. This can lead to some interesting new insights, such as described below.

How can a very uniform electric field be created? Consider a system of two metal plates with opposite charges on
them, as shown in Figure 18.29. The properties of conductors in electrostatic equilibrium indicate that the electric
field between the plates will be uniform in strength and direction. Except near the edges, the excess charges
distribute themselves uniformly, producing field lines that are uniformly spaced (hence uniform in strength) and
perpendicular to the surfaces (hence uniform in direction, since the plates are flat). The edge effects are less
important when the plates are close together.

FIGURE 18.29 Two metal plates with equal, but opposite, excess charges. The field between them is uniform in strength and direction
except near the edges. One use of such a field is to produce uniform acceleration of charges between the plates, such as in the electron gun
of a TV tube.

Earth’s Electric Field

A near uniform electric field of approximately 150 N/C, directed downward, surrounds Earth, with the magnitude
increasing slightly as we get closer to the surface. What causes the electric field? At around 100 km above the
surface of Earth we have a layer of charged particles, called the ionosphere. The ionosphere is responsible for a
range of phenomena including the electric field surrounding Earth. In fair weather the ionosphere is positive and the
Earth largely negative, maintaining the electric field (Figure 18.30(a)).

In storm conditions clouds form and localized electric fields can be larger and reversed in direction (Figure
18.30(b)). The exact charge distributions depend on the local conditions, and variations of Figure 18.30(b) are
possible.

If the electric field is sufficiently large, the insulating properties of the surrounding material break down and it
becomes conducting. For air this occurs at around

N/C. Air ionizes ions and electrons recombine, and we

796

18 • Electric Charge and Electric Field

get discharge in the form of lightning sparks and corona discharge.

FIGURE 18.30 Earth’s electric field. (a) Fair weather field. Earth and the ionosphere (a layer of charged particles) are both conductors. They
produce a uniform electric field of about 150 N/C. (credit: D. H. Parks) (b) Storm fields. In the presence of storm clouds, the local electric
fields can be larger. At very high fields, the insulating properties of the air break down and lightning can occur. (credit: Jan-Joost Verhoef)

Electric Fields on Uneven Surfaces

So far we have considered excess charges on a smooth, symmetrical conductor surface. What happens if a
conductor has sharp corners or is pointed? Excess charges on a nonuniform conductor become concentrated at the
sharpest points. Additionally, excess charge may move on or off the conductor at the sharpest points.

To see how and why this happens, consider the charged conductor in Figure 18.31. The electrostatic repulsion of
like charges is most effective in moving them apart on the flattest surface, and so they become least concentrated
there. This is because the forces between identical pairs of charges at either end of the conductor are identical, but
the components of the forces parallel to the surfaces are different. The component parallel to the surface is greatest
on the flattest surface and, hence, more effective in moving the charge.

The same effect is produced on a conductor by an externally applied electric field, as seen in Figure 18.31 (c). Since
the field lines must be perpendicular to the surface, more of them are concentrated on the most curved parts.

FIGURE 18.31 Excess charge on a nonuniform conductor becomes most concentrated at the location of greatest curvature. (a) The forces
between identical pairs of charges at either end of the conductor are identical, but the components of the forces parallel to the surface are
different. It is
is smallest at the more pointed end, the charges
are left closer together, producing the electric field shown. (c) An uncharged conductor in an originally uniform electric field is polarized,
with the most concentrated charge at its most pointed end.

that moves the charges apart once they have reached the surface. (b)

Applications of Conductors

On a very sharply curved surface, such as shown in Figure 18.32, the charges are so concentrated at the point that
the resulting electric field can be great enough to remove them from the surface. This can be useful.

Lightning rods work best when they are most pointed. The large charges created in storm clouds induce an opposite
charge on a building that can result in a lightning bolt hitting the building. The induced charge is bled away
continually by a lightning rod, preventing the more dramatic lightning strike.

Of course, we sometimes wish to prevent the transfer of charge rather than to facilitate it. In that case, the
conductor should be very smooth and have as large a radius of curvature as possible. (See Figure 18.33.) Smooth
surfaces are used on high-voltage transmission lines, for example, to avoid leakage of charge into the air.

Another device that makes use of some of these principles is a Faraday cage. This is a metal shield that encloses a

Access for free at openstax.org

18.8 • Applications of Electrostatics

797

volume. All electrical charges will reside on the outside surface of this shield, and there will be no electrical field
inside. A Faraday cage is used to prohibit stray electrical fields in the environment from interfering with sensitive
measurements, such as the electrical signals inside a nerve cell.

During electrical storms if you are driving a car, it is best to stay inside the car as its metal body acts as a Faraday
cage with zero electrical field inside. If in the vicinity of a lightning strike, its effect is felt on the outside of the car
and the inside is unaffected, provided you remain totally inside. This is also true if an active (“hot”) electrical wire
was broken (in a storm or an accident) and fell on your car.

FIGURE 18.32 A very pointed conductor has a large charge concentration at the point. The electric field is very strong at the point and can
exert a force large enough to transfer charge on or off the conductor. Lightning rods are used to prevent the buildup of large excess charges
on structures and, thus, are pointed.

FIGURE 18.33 (a) A lightning rod is pointed to facilitate the transfer of charge. (credit: Romaine, Wikimedia Commons) (b) This Van de
Graaff generator has a smooth surface with a large radius of curvature to prevent the transfer of charge and allow a large voltage to be
generated. The mutual repulsion of like charges is evident in the person’s hair while touching the metal sphere. (credit: Jon ‘ShakataGaNai’
Davis/Wikimedia Commons).

18.8 Applications of Electrostatics

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

The study of electrostatics has proven useful in many areas. This module covers just a few of the many applications
of electrostatics.

• Name several real-world applications of the study of electrostatics.

798

18 • Electric Charge and Electric Field

The Van de Graaff Generator

Van de Graaff generators (or Van de Graaffs) are not only spectacular devices used to demonstrate high voltage
due to static electricity—they are also used for serious research. The first was built by Robert Van de Graaff in 1931
(based on original suggestions by Lord Kelvin) for use in nuclear physics research. Figure 18.34 shows a schematic
of a large research version. Van de Graaffs utilize both smooth and pointed surfaces, and conductors and insulators
to generate large static charges and, hence, large voltages.

A very large excess charge can be deposited on the sphere, because it moves quickly to the outer surface. Practical
limits arise because the large electric fields polarize and eventually ionize surrounding materials, creating free
charges that neutralize excess charge or allow it to escape. Nevertheless, voltages of 15 million volts are well within
practical limits.

FIGURE 18.34 Schematic of Van de Graaff generator. A battery (A) supplies excess positive charge to a pointed conductor, the points of
which spray the charge onto a moving insulating belt near the bottom. The pointed conductor (B) on top in the large sphere picks up the
charge. (The induced electric field at the points is so large that it removes the charge from the belt.) This can be done because the charge
does not remain inside the conducting sphere but moves to its outside surface. An ion source inside the sphere produces positive ions,
which are accelerated away from the positive sphere to high velocities.

Take-Home Experiment: Electrostatics and Humidity

Rub a comb through your hair and use it to lift pieces of paper. It may help to tear the pieces of paper rather than
cut them neatly. Repeat the exercise in your bathroom after you have had a long shower and the air in the
bathroom is moist. Is it easier to get electrostatic effects in dry or moist air? Why would torn paper be more
attractive to the comb than cut paper? Explain your observations.

Xerography

Most copy machines use an electrostatic process called xerography—a word coined from the Greek words xerosfor
dry and graphosfor writing. The heart of the process is shown in simplified form in Figure 18.35.

A selenium-coated aluminum drum is sprayed with positive charge from points on a device called a corotron.
Selenium is a substance with an interesting property—it is a photoconductor. That is, selenium is an insulator when

Access for free at openstax.org

18.8 • Applications of Electrostatics

799

in the dark and a conductor when exposed to light.

In the first stage of the xerography process, the conducting aluminum drum is grounded so that a negative charge is
induced under the thin layer of uniformly positively charged selenium. In the second stage, the surface of the drum
is exposed to the image of whatever is to be copied. Where the image is light, the selenium becomes conducting,
and the positive charge is neutralized. In dark areas, the positive charge remains, and so the image has been
transferred to the drum.

The third stage takes a dry black powder, called toner, and sprays it with a negative charge so that it will be attracted
to the positive regions of the drum. Next, a blank piece of paper is given a greater positive charge than on the drum
so that it will pull the toner from the drum. Finally, the paper and electrostatically held toner are passed through
heated pressure rollers, which melt and permanently adhere the toner within the fibers of the paper.

FIGURE 18.35 Xerography is a dry copying process based on electrostatics. The major steps in the process are the charging of the
photoconducting drum, transfer of an image creating a positive charge duplicate, attraction of toner to the charged parts of the drum, and
transfer of toner to the paper. Not shown are heat treatment of the paper and cleansing of the drum for the next copy.

Laser Printers

Laser printers use the xerographic process to make high-quality images on paper, employing a laser to produce an
image on the photoconducting drum as shown in Figure 18.36. In its most common application, the laser printer
receives output from a computer, and it can achieve high-quality output because of the precision with which laser
light can be controlled. Many laser printers do significant information processing, such as making sophisticated
letters or fonts, and may contain a computer more powerful than the one giving them the raw data to be printed.

FIGURE 18.36 In a laser printer, a laser beam is scanned across a photoconducting drum, leaving a positive charge image. The other steps
for charging the drum and transferring the image to paper are the same as in xerography. Laser light can be very precisely controlled,
enabling laser printers to produce high-quality images.

800

18 • Electric Charge and Electric Field

Ink Jet Printers and Electrostatic Painting

The ink jet printer, commonly used to print computer-generated text and graphics, also employs electrostatics. A
nozzle makes a fine spray of tiny ink droplets, which are then given an electrostatic charge. (See Figure 18.37.)

Once charged, the droplets can be directed, using pairs of charged plates, with great precision to form letters and
images on paper. Ink jet printers can produce color images by using a black jet and three other jets with primary
colors, usually cyan, magenta, and yellow, much as a color television produces color. (This is more difficult with
xerography, requiring multiple drums and toners.)

FIGURE 18.37 The nozzle of an ink-jet printer produces small ink droplets, which are sprayed with electrostatic charge. Various computer-
driven devices are then used to direct the droplets to the correct positions on a page.

Electrostatic painting employs electrostatic charge to spray paint onto odd-shaped surfaces. Mutual repulsion of like
charges causes the paint to fly away from its source. Surface tension forms drops, which are then attracted by unlike
charges to the surface to be painted. Electrostatic painting can reach those hard-to-get at places, applying an even
coat in a controlled manner. If the object is a conductor, the electric field is perpendicular to the surface, tending to
bring the drops in perpendicularly. Corners and points on conductors will receive extra paint. Felt can similarly be
applied.

Smoke Precipitators and Electrostatic Air Cleaning

Another important application of electrostatics is found in air cleaners, both large and small. The electrostatic part
of the process places excess (usually positive) charge on smoke, dust, pollen, and other particles in the air and then
passes the air through an oppositely charged grid that attracts and retains the charged particles. (See Figure 18.38.)

Large electrostatic precipitators are used industrially to remove over 99% of the particles from stack gas emissions
associated with the burning of coal and oil. Home precipitators, often in conjunction with the home heating and air
conditioning system, are very effective in removing polluting particles, irritants, and allergens.

Access for free at openstax.org

18.8 • Applications of Electrostatics

801

FIGURE 18.38 (a) Schematic of an electrostatic precipitator. Air is passed through grids of opposite charge. The first grid charges airborne
particles, while the second attracts and collects them. (b) The dramatic effect of electrostatic precipitators is seen by the absence of smoke
from this power plant. (credit: Cmdalgleish, Wikimedia Commons)

Problem-Solving Strategies for Electrostatics

1. Examine the situation to determine if static electricity is involved. This may concern separated stationary

2.
3.

charges, the forces among them, and the electric fields they create.
Identify the system of interest. This includes noting the number, locations, and types of charges involved.
Identify exactly what needs to be determined in the problem (identify the unknowns). A written list is
useful. Determine whether the Coulomb force is to be considered directly—if so, it may be useful to draw a
free-body diagram, using electric field lines.

4. Make a list of what is given or can be inferred from the problem as stated (identify the knowns). It is

important to distinguish the Coulomb force

from the electric field , for example.

5. Solve the appropriate equation for the quantity to be determined (the unknown) or draw the field lines as

requested.

6. Examine the answer to see if it is reasonable: Does it make sense? Are units correct and the numbers

involved reasonable?

Integrated Concepts

The Integrated Concepts exercises for this module involve concepts such as electric charges, electric fields, and
several other topics. Physics is most interesting when applied to general situations involving more than a narrow set
of physical principles. The electric field exerts force on charges, for example, and hence the relevance of Dynamics:
Force and Newton’s Laws of Motion. The following topics are involved in some or all of the problems labeled
“Integrated Concepts”:

• Kinematics
• Two-Dimensional Kinematics
• Dynamics: Force and Newton’s Laws of Motion
• Uniform Circular Motion and Gravitation
• Statics and Torque
• Fluid Statics

The following worked example illustrates how this strategy is applied to an Integrated Concept problem:

802

18 • Electric Charge and Electric Field

EXAMPLE 18.5

Acceleration of a Charged Drop of Gasoline
If steps are not taken to ground a gasoline pump, static electricity can be placed on gasoline when filling your car’s
tank. Suppose a tiny drop of gasoline has a mass of

and is given a positive charge of

. (a) Find the weight of the drop. (b) Calculate the electric force on the drop if there is an upward

electric field of strength
acceleration.

Strategy

due to other static electricity in the vicinity. (c) Calculate the drop’s

To solve an integrated concept problem, we must first identify the physical principles involved and identify the
chapters in which they are found. Part (a) of this example asks for weight. This is a topic of dynamics and is defined
in Dynamics: Force and Newton’s Laws of Motion. Part (b) deals with electric force on a charge, a topic of Electric
Charge and Electric Field. Part (c) asks for acceleration, knowing forces and mass. These are part of Newton’s laws,
also found in Dynamics: Force and Newton’s Laws of Motion.

The following solutions to each part of the example illustrate how the specific problem-solving strategies are
applied. These involve identifying knowns and unknowns, checking to see if the answer is reasonable, and so on.

Solution for (a)

Weight is mass times the acceleration due to gravity, as first expressed in

Entering the given mass and the average acceleration due to gravity yields

Discussion for (a)

This is a small weight, consistent with the small mass of the drop.

Solution for (b)

The force an electric field exerts on a charge is given by rearranging the following equation:

Here we are given the charge (
strength, and so the electric force is found to be

is twice the fundamental unit of charge) and the electric field

18.20

18.21

18.22

18.23

Discussion for (b)

While this is a small force, it is greater than the weight of the drop.

Solution for (c)

The acceleration can be found using Newton’s second law, provided we can identify all of the external forces acting
on the drop. We assume only the drop’s weight and the electric force are significant. Since the drop has a positive
charge and the electric field is given to be upward, the electric force is upward. We thus have a one-dimensional
(vertical direction) problem, and we can state Newton’s second law as

18.24

where

. Entering this and the known values into the expression for Newton’s second law yields

Access for free at openstax.org

18.8 • Applications of Electrostatics

803

18.25

Discussion for (c)

This is an upward acceleration great enough to carry the drop to places where you might not wish to have gasoline.

This worked example illustrates how to apply problem-solving strategies to situations that include topics in different
chapters. The first step is to identify the physical principles involved in the problem. The second step is to solve for
the unknown using familiar problem-solving strategies. These are found throughout the text, and many worked
examples show how to use them for single topics. In this integrated concepts example, you can see how to apply
them across several topics. You will find these techniques useful in applications of physics outside a physics course,
such as in your profession, in other science disciplines, and in everyday life. The following problems will build your
skills in the broad application of physical principles.

Unreasonable Results

The Unreasonable Results exercises for this module have results that are unreasonable because some premise
is unreasonable or because certain of the premises are inconsistent with one another. Physical principles
applied correctly then produce unreasonable results. The purpose of these problems is to give practice in
assessing whether nature is being accurately described, and if it is not to trace the source of difficulty.

Problem-Solving Strategy

To determine if an answer is reasonable, and to determine the cause if it is not, do the following.

1. Solve the problem using strategies as outlined above. Use the format followed in the worked examples in

the text to solve the problem as usual.

2. Check to see if the answer is reasonable. Is it too large or too small, or does it have the wrong sign,

3.

improper units, and so on?
If the answer is unreasonable, look for what specifically could cause the identified difficulty. Usually, the
manner in which the answer is unreasonable is an indication of the difficulty. For example, an extremely
large Coulomb force could be due to the assumption of an excessively large separated charge.

804

18 • Glossary

Glossary

conductor a material that allows electrons to move

separately from their atomic orbits

conductor an object with properties that allow

grounded connected to the ground with a conductor,
so that charge flows freely to and from the Earth to
the grounded object

charges to move about freely within it

grounded when a conductor is connected to the

Coulomb force another term for the electrostatic

force

Earth, allowing charge to freely flow to and from
Earth’s unlimited reservoir

Coulomb interaction the interaction between two

induction the process by which an electrically

charged particles generated by the Coulomb forces
they exert on one another

charged object brought near a neutral object creates
a charge in that object

Coulomb’s law the mathematical equation

ink-jet printer small ink droplets sprayed with an

calculating the electrostatic force vector between
two charged particles

electric charge are controlled by electrostatic plates
to create images on paper

dipole a molecule’s lack of symmetrical charge

insulator a material that holds electrons securely

distribution, causing one side to be more positive
and another to be more negative

electric charge a physical property of an object that
causes it to be attracted toward or repelled from
another charged object; each charged object
generates and is influenced by a force called an
electromagnetic force

electric field a three-dimensional map of the electric
force extended out into space from a point charge

electric field lines a series of lines drawn from a
point charge representing the magnitude and
direction of force exerted by that charge

electromagnetic force one of the four fundamental

forces of nature; the electromagnetic force consists
of static electricity, moving electricity and
magnetism

within their atomic orbits

ionosphere a layer of charged particles located

around 100 km above the surface of Earth, which is
responsible for a range of phenomena including the
electric field surrounding Earth

laser printer uses a laser to create a photoconductive
image on a drum, which attracts dry ink particles
that are then rolled onto a sheet of paper to print a
high-quality copy of the image

law of conservation of charge states that whenever
a charge is created, an equal amount of charge with
the opposite sign is created simultaneously

photoconductor a substance that is an insulator until
it is exposed to light, when it becomes a conductor

point charge A charged particle, designated ,

generating an electric field

electron a particle orbiting the nucleus of an atom
and carrying the smallest unit of negative charge

polar molecule a molecule with an asymmetrical
distribution of positive and negative charge

electrostatic equilibrium an electrostatically

balanced state in which all free electrical charges
have stopped moving about

electrostatic force the amount and direction of

attraction or repulsion between two charged bodies
electrostatic precipitators filters that apply charges
to particles in the air, then attract those charges to a
filter, removing them from the airstream

electrostatic repulsion the phenomenon of two
objects with like charges repelling each other
electrostatics the study of electric forces that are

static or slow-moving

polarization slight shifting of positive and negative
charges to opposite sides of an atom or molecule
polarized a state in which the positive and negative
charges within an object have collected in separate
locations

proton a particle in the nucleus of an atom and

carrying a positive charge equal in magnitude and
opposite in sign to the amount of negative charge
carried by an electron

screening the dilution or blocking of an electrostatic
force on a charged object by the presence of other
charges nearby

Faraday cage a metal shield which prevents electric

static electricity a buildup of electric charge on the

charge from penetrating its surface

surface of an object

field a map of the amount and direction of a force
acting on other objects, extending out into space
free charge an electrical charge (either positive or

negative) which can move about separately from its
base molecule

free electron an electron that is free to move away

test charge A particle (designated ) with either a
positive or negative charge set down within an
electric field generated by a point charge

Van de Graaff generator a machine that produces a

large amount of excess charge, used for
experiments with high voltage

from its atomic orbit

vector a quantity with both magnitude and direction

Access for free at openstax.org

vector addition mathematical combination of two or

xerography a dry copying process based on

18 • Section Summary

805

more vectors, including their magnitudes,
directions, and positions

Section Summary

18.1 Static Electricity and Charge:
Conservation of Charge

• There are only two types of charge, which we call

positive and negative.

• Like charges repel, unlike charges attract, and the
force between charges decreases with the square
of the distance.

• The vast majority of positive charge in nature is
carried by protons, while the vast majority of
negative charge is carried by electrons.

• The electric charge of one electron is equal in

magnitude and opposite in sign to the charge of
one proton.

• An ion is an atom or molecule that has nonzero
total charge due to having unequal numbers of
electrons and protons.

• The SI unit for charge is the coulomb (C), with

protons and electrons having charges of opposite
sign but equal magnitude; the magnitude of this
basic charge

is

• Whenever charge is created or destroyed, equal
amounts of positive and negative are involved.
• Most often, existing charges are separated from

neutral objects to obtain some net charge.

• Both positive and negative charges exist in neutral

objects and can be separated by rubbing one
object with another. For macroscopic objects,
negatively charged means an excess of electrons
and positively charged means a depletion of
electrons.

• The law of conservation of charge ensures that

whenever a charge is created, an equal charge of
the opposite sign is created at the same time.

18.2 Conductors and Insulators

• Polarization is the separation of positive and

negative charges in a neutral object.

• A conductor is a substance that allows charge to

flow freely through its atomic structure.
• An insulator holds charge within its atomic

structure.

• Objects with like charges repel each other, while
those with unlike charges attract each other.
• A conducting object is said to be grounded if it is
connected to the Earth through a conductor.
Grounding allows transfer of charge to and from

electrostatics

the earth’s large reservoir.

• Objects can be charged by contact with another
charged object and obtain the same sign charge.
If an object is temporarily grounded, it can be
charged by induction, and obtains the opposite
sign charge.

•

• Polarized objects have their positive and negative
charges concentrated in different areas, giving
them a non-symmetrical charge.

• Polar molecules have an inherent separation of

charge.

18.3 Coulomb’s Law

• Frenchman Charles Coulomb was the first to

publish the mathematical equation that describes
the electrostatic force between two objects.
• Coulomb’s law gives the magnitude of the force

between point charges. It is

where
by a distance , and

and

are two point charges separated

• This Coulomb force is extremely basic, since most

charges are due to point-like particles. It is
responsible for all electrostatic effects and
underlies most macroscopic forces.

• The Coulomb force is extraordinarily strong

compared with the gravitational force, another
basic force—but unlike gravitational force it can
cancel, since it can be either attractive or
repulsive.

• The electrostatic force between two subatomic

particles is far greater than the gravitational force
between the same two particles.

18.4 Electric Field: Concept of a Field
Revisited

• The electrostatic force field surrounding a charged
object extends out into space in all directions.
• The electrostatic force exerted by a point charge
on a test charge at a distance depends on the
charge of both charges, as well as the distance
between the two.
• The electric field

is defined to be

is the Coulomb or electrostatic force

where
exerted on a small positive test charge .

has

806

18 • Conceptual Questions

units of N/C.

• The magnitude of the electric field
is

point charge

created by a

where is the distance from . The electric field
is a vector and fields due to multiple charges add
like vectors.

18.5 Electric Field Lines: Multiple Charges

• Drawings of electric field lines are useful visual

tools. The properties of electric field lines for any
charge distribution are that:

• Field lines must begin on positive charges and

terminate on negative charges, or at infinity in the
hypothetical case of isolated charges.

• The number of field lines leaving a positive charge
or entering a negative charge is proportional to the
magnitude of the charge.

• The strength of the field is proportional to the

closeness of the field lines—more precisely, it is
proportional to the number of lines per unit area
perpendicular to the lines.

• The direction of the electric field is tangent to the

field line at any point in space.

• Field lines can never cross.

18.6 Electric Forces in Biology

• Many molecules in living organisms, such as DNA,

carry a charge.

• An uneven distribution of the positive and negative
charges within a polar molecule produces a dipole.

• The effect of a Coulomb field generated by a

charged object may be reduced or blocked by
other nearby charged objects.

Conceptual Questions

18.1 Static Electricity and Charge:
Conservation of Charge

1. There are very large numbers of charged particles in
most objects. Why, then, don’t most objects exhibit
static electricity?

2. Why do most objects tend to contain nearly equal

numbers of positive and negative charges?

Access for free at openstax.org

• Biological systems contain water, and because
water molecules are polar, they have a strong
effect on other molecules in living systems.

18.7 Conductors and Electric Fields in Static
Equilibrium

• A conductor allows free charges to move about

within it.

• The electrical forces around a conductor will cause
free charges to move around inside the conductor
until static equilibrium is reached.

• Any excess charge will collect along the surface of

a conductor.

• Conductors with sharp corners or points will

collect more charge at those points.

• A lightning rod is a conductor with sharply pointed
ends that collect excess charge on the building
caused by an electrical storm and allow it to
dissipate back into the air.

• Electrical storms result when the electrical field of
Earth’s surface in certain locations becomes more
strongly charged, due to changes in the insulating
effect of the air.

• A Faraday cage acts like a shield around an object,
preventing electric charge from penetrating inside.

18.8 Applications of Electrostatics

• Electrostatics is the study of electric fields in static

•

equilibrium.
In addition to research using equipment such as a
Van de Graaff generator, many practical
applications of electrostatics exist, including
photocopiers, laser printers, ink-jet printers and
electrostatic air filters.

18.2 Conductors and Insulators

3. An eccentric inventor attempts to levitate by first

placing a large negative charge on himself and then
putting a large positive charge on the ceiling of his
workshop. Instead, while attempting to place a
large negative charge on himself, his clothes fly off.
Explain.

4. If you have charged an electroscope by contact with
a positively charged object, describe how you could
use it to determine the charge of other objects.
Specifically, what would the leaves of the
electroscope do if other charged objects were
brought near its knob?

18 • Conceptual Questions

807

5. When a glass rod is rubbed with silk, it becomes
positive and the silk becomes negative—yet both
attract dust. Does the dust have a third type of
charge that is attracted to both positive and
negative? Explain.

6. Why does a car always attract dust right after it is
polished? (Note that car wax and car tires are
insulators.)

7. Describe how a positively charged object can be

used to give another object a negative charge. What
is the name of this process?

8. What is grounding? What effect does it have on a
charged conductor? On a charged insulator?

18.3 Coulomb’s Law

9. Figure 18.39 shows the charge distribution in a

water molecule, which is called a polar molecule
because it has an inherent separation of charge.
Given water’s polar character, explain what effect
humidity has on removing excess charge from
objects.

13. Are the direction and magnitude of the Coulomb

force unique at a given point in space? What about
the electric field?

18.5 Electric Field Lines: Multiple Charges

14. Compare and contrast the Coulomb force field and
the electric field. To do this, make a list of five
properties for the Coulomb force field analogous
to the five properties listed for electric field lines.
Compare each item in your list of Coulomb force
field properties with those of the electric field—are
they the same or different? (For example, electric
field lines cannot cross. Is the same true for
Coulomb field lines?)

15. Figure 18.40 shows an electric field extending

over three regions, labeled I, II, and III. Answer
the following questions. (a) Are there any isolated
charges? If so, in what region and what are their
signs? (b) Where is the field strongest? (c) Where
is it weakest? (d) Where is the field the most
uniform?

FIGURE 18.39 Schematic representation of the outer electron
cloud of a neutral water molecule. The electrons spend more
time near the oxygen than the hydrogens, giving a permanent
charge separation as shown. Water is thus a polar molecule. It
is more easily affected by electrostatic forces than molecules
with uniform charge distributions.

10. Using Figure 18.39, explain, in terms of Coulomb’s
law, why a polar molecule (such as in Figure
18.39) is attracted by both positive and negative
charges.

11. Given the polar character of water molecules,

explain how ions in the air form nucleation centers
for rain droplets.

18.4 Electric Field: Concept of a Field
Revisited

12. Why must the test charge in the definition of the

electric field be vanishingly small?

FIGURE 18.40

18.6 Electric Forces in Biology

16. A cell membrane is a thin layer enveloping a cell.
The thickness of the membrane is much less than
the size of the cell. In a static situation the
membrane has a charge distribution of

C/m 2 on its inner surface and
C/m2 on its outer surface. Draw a

diagram of the cell and the surrounding cell
membrane. Include on this diagram the charge
distribution and the corresponding electric field. Is
there any electric field inside the cell? Is there any
electric field outside the cell?

808

18 • Conceptual Questions

18.7 Conductors and Electric Fields in Static
Equilibrium

17. Is the object in Figure 18.41 a conductor or an

insulator? Justify your answer.

FIGURE 18.41

18. If the electric field lines in the figure above were
perpendicular to the object, would it necessarily
be a conductor? Explain.

19. The discussion of the electric field between two
parallel conducting plates, in this module states
that edge effects are less important if the plates
are close together. What does close mean? That is,
is the actual plate separation crucial, or is the ratio
of plate separation to plate area crucial?

20. Would the self-created electric field at the end of
a pointed conductor, such as a lightning rod,
remove positive or negative charge from the
conductor? Would the same sign charge be
removed from a neutral pointed conductor by the
application of a similar externally created electric
field? (The answers to both questions have
implications for charge transfer utilizing points.)
21. Why is a golfer with a metal club over her shoulder

vulnerable to lightning in an open fairway? Would
she be any safer under a tree?

22. Can the belt of a Van de Graaff accelerator be a

conductor? Explain.

23. Are you relatively safe from lightning inside an

automobile? Give two reasons.

24. Discuss pros and cons of a lightning rod being

grounded versus simply being attached to a
building.

25. Using the symmetry of the arrangement, show

that the net Coulomb force on the charge at the
center of the square below (Figure 18.42) is zero if
the charges on the four corners are exactly equal.

Access for free at openstax.org

FIGURE 18.42 Four point charges
, and
corners of a square and is located at its center.

,

,

lie on the

26. (a) Using the symmetry of the arrangement, show
that the electric field at the center of the square in
Figure 18.42 is zero if the charges on the four
corners are exactly equal. (b) Show that this is
also true for any combination of charges in which

and

27. (a) What is the direction of the total Coulomb force

is negative,

on in Figure 18.42 if
both are negative, and
positive? (b) What is the direction of the electric
field at the center of the square in this situation?

and both are

and

28. Considering Figure 18.42, suppose that

is in static

. First show that

and
equilibrium. (You may neglect the gravitational
force.) Then discuss whether the equilibrium is
stable or unstable, noting that this may depend on
the signs of the charges and the direction of
displacement of

from the center of the square.
in Figure 18.42, under what conditions

29. If

will there be no net Coulomb force on ?

30. In regions of low humidity, one develops a special
“grip” when opening car doors, or touching metal
door knobs. This involves placing as much of the
hand on the device as possible, not just the ends
of one’s fingers. Discuss the induced charge and
explain why this is done.

31. Tollbooth stations on roadways and bridges

usually have a piece of wire stuck in the pavement
before them that will touch a car as it approaches.
Why is this done?

32. Suppose a person carries an excess charge. To

maintain their charged status can they be standing
on ground wearing just any pair of shoes? How
would you discharge them? What are the
consequences if they simply walk away?

Problems & Exercises

18.1 Static Electricity and Charge:
Conservation of Charge

1. Common static electricity involves charges ranging
from nanocoulombs to microcoulombs. (a) How
many electrons are needed to form a charge of

(b) How many electrons must be removed

from a neutral object to leave a net charge of

?

2. If

electrons move through a pocket

calculator during a full day’s operation, how many
coulombs of charge moved through it?
3. To start a car engine, the car battery moves

electrons through the starter motor.

How many coulombs of charge were moved?
4. A certain lightning bolt moves 40.0 C of charge.

How many fundamental units of charge

is this?

18.2 Conductors and Insulators

5. Suppose a speck of dust in an electrostatic

precipitator has
has a net charge of –5.00 nC (a very large charge for
a small speck). How many electrons does it have?

protons in it and

6. An amoeba has

protons and a net

charge of 0.300 pC. (a) How many fewer electrons
are there than protons? (b) If you paired them up,
what fraction of the protons would have no
electrons?

7. A 50.0 g ball of copper has a net charge of

.

What fraction of the copper’s electrons has been
removed? (Each copper atom has 29 protons, and
copper has an atomic mass of 63.5.)

8. What net charge would you place on a 100 g piece
of

of sulfur if you put an extra electron on 1 in
its atoms? (Sulfur has an atomic mass of 32.1.)
9. How many coulombs of positive charge are there in
4.00 kg of plutonium, given its atomic mass is 244
and that each plutonium atom has 94 protons?

18.3 Coulomb’s Law

10. What is the repulsive force between two pith balls
that are 8.00 cm apart and have equal charges of
– 30.0 nC?

11. (a) How strong is the attractive force between a

charge and a silk cloth

charge, which are 12.0 cm

glass rod with a
with a
apart, using the approximation that they act like
point charges? (b) Discuss how the answer to this
problem might be affected if the charges are
distributed over some area and do not act like
point charges.

18 • Problems & Exercises

809

12. Two point charges exert a 5.00 N force on each

other. What will the force become if the distance
between them is increased by a factor of three?
13. Two point charges are brought closer together,

increasing the force between them by a factor of
25. By what factor was their separation
decreased?

14. How far apart must two point charges of 75.0 nC
(typical of static electricity) be to have a force of
1.00 N between them?

15. If two equal charges each of 1 C each are

separated in air by a distance of 1 km, what is the
magnitude of the force acting between them? You
will see that even at a distance as large as 1 km,
the repulsive force is substantial because 1 C is a
very significant amount of charge.

is placed halfway between

16. A test charge of
a charge of
separated by 10 cm. (a) What is the magnitude of
the force on the test charge? (b) What is the
direction of this force (away from or toward the

and another of

charge)?

17. Bare free charges do not remain stationary when
close together. To illustrate this, calculate the
acceleration of two isolated protons separated by
2.00 nm (a typical distance between gas atoms).
Explicitly show how you follow the steps in the
Problem-Solving Strategy for electrostatics.
18. (a) By what factor must you change the distance

between two point charges to change the force
between them by a factor of 10? (b) Explain how
the distance can either increase or decrease by
this factor and still cause a factor of 10 change in
the force.

19. Suppose you have a total charge

that you can

split in any manner. Once split, the separation
distance is fixed. How do you split the charge to
achieve the greatest force?

20. (a) Common transparent tape becomes charged
when pulled from a dispenser. If one piece is
placed above another, the repulsive force can be
great enough to support the top piece’s weight.
Assuming equal point charges (only an
approximation), calculate the magnitude of the
charge if electrostatic force is great enough to
support the weight of a 10.0 mg piece of tape held
1.00 cm above another. (b) Discuss whether the
magnitude of this charge is consistent with what is
typical of static electricity.

32. (a) Find the magnitude and direction of an electric
westward force

field that exerts a
on an electron. (b) What magnitude and direction
force does this field exert on a proton?

18.5 Electric Field Lines: Multiple Charges

33. (a) Sketch the electric field lines near a point
. (b) Do the same for a point charge

charge

.

34. Sketch the electric field lines a long distance from
the charge distributions shown in Figure 18.23 (a)
and (b)

35. Figure 18.43 shows the electric field lines near
. What is the ratio of their
two charges
magnitudes? (b) Sketch the electric field lines a
long distance from the charges shown in the
figure.

and

FIGURE 18.43 The electric field near two charges.

36. Sketch the electric field lines in the vicinity of two
opposite charges, where the negative charge is
three times greater in magnitude than the positive.
(See Figure 18.43 for a similar situation).

810

18 • Problems & Exercises

21. (a) Find the ratio of the electrostatic to

gravitational force between two electrons. (b)
What is this ratio for two protons? (c) Why is the
ratio different for electrons and protons?
22. At what distance is the electrostatic force

between two protons equal to the weight of one
proton?

23. A certain five cent coin contains 5.00 g of nickel.
What fraction of the nickel atoms’ electrons,
removed and placed 1.00 m above it, would
support the weight of this coin? The atomic mass
of nickel is 58.7, and each nickel atom contains 28
electrons and 28 protons.
24. (a) Two point charges totaling

exert a

repulsive force of 0.150 N on one another when
separated by 0.500 m. What is the charge on
each? (b) What is the charge on each if the force is
attractive?
25. Point charges of

are placed

and

0.250 m apart. (a) Where can a third charge be
placed so that the net force on it is zero? (b) What
if both charges are positive?

26. Two point charges

and

are

apart,

. (a) If the force of

and their total charge is
repulsion between them is 0.075N, what are
magnitudes of the two charges? (b) If one charge
attracts the other with a force of 0.525N, what are
the magnitudes of the two charges? Note that you
may need to solve a quadratic equation to reach
your answer.

18.4 Electric Field: Concept of a Field
Revisited

27. What is the magnitude and direction of an electric
upward force on

field that exerts a
a

charge?

28. What is the magnitude and direction of the force

exerted on a
field that points due east?

charge by a 250 N/C electric

29. Calculate the magnitude of the electric field 2.00
m from a point charge of 5.00 mC (such as found
on the terminal of a Van de Graaff).

30. (a) What magnitude point charge creates a 10,000
N/C electric field at a distance of 0.250 m? (b)
How large is the field at 10.0 m?

31. Calculate the initial (from rest) acceleration of a

electric field (such as

proton in a
created by a research Van de Graaff). Explicitly
show how you follow the steps in the Problem-
Solving Strategy for electrostatics.

Access for free at openstax.org

18 • Problems & Exercises

811

40. Sketch the electric field lines in the vicinity of the
charged insulator in Figure 18.47 noting its
nonuniform charge distribution.

18.7 Conductors and Electric Fields in Static
Equilibrium

37. Sketch the electric field lines in the vicinity of the
conductor in Figure 18.44 given the field was
originally uniform and parallel to the object’s long
axis. Is the resulting field small near the long side
of the object?

FIGURE 18.44

38. Sketch the electric field lines in the vicinity of the
conductor in Figure 18.45 given the field was
originally uniform and parallel to the object’s long
axis. Is the resulting field small near the long side
of the object?

FIGURE 18.47 A charged insulating rod such as might be
used in a classroom demonstration.

41. What is the force on the charge located at
in Figure 18.48(a) given that
?

FIGURE 18.45

39. Sketch the electric field between the two

conducting plates shown in Figure 18.46, given
the top plate is positive and an equal amount of
negative charge is on the bottom plate. Be certain
to indicate the distribution of charge on the plates.

FIGURE 18.46

FIGURE 18.48 (a) Point charges located at 3.00, 8.00, and
11.0 cm along the x-axis. (b) Point charges located at 1.00,
5.00, 8.00, and 14.0 cm along the x-axis.

42. (a) Find the total electric field at

in
Figure 18.48(b). (b) If the charges are allowed to
move and eventually be brought to rest by friction,
what will the final charge configuration be? (That
is, will there be a single charge, double charge,
etc., and what will its value(s) be?)

43. (a) Find the electric field at

in Figure

. (b) At what

18.48(a), given that
position between 3.00 and 8.00 cm is the total
electric field the same as that for
alone? (c)
Can the electric field be zero anywhere between
0.00 and 8.00 cm? (d) At very large positive or
negative values of x,the electric field approaches
zero in both (a) and (b). In which does it most
rapidly approach zero and why? (e) At what
position to the right of 11.0 cm is the total electric
field zero, other than at infinity? (Hint: A graphing
calculator can yield considerable insight in this
problem.)

812

18 • Problems & Exercises

44. (a) Find the total Coulomb force on a charge of

49. (a) Find the electric field at the location of

in

2.00 nC located at
(b), given that
at which the electric field is zero in Figure 18.48
(b).

in Figure 18.48

. (b) Find the x-position

Figure 18.50, given that

. (b) What is the force on

and
, given

that

?

45. Using the symmetry of the arrangement,

determine the direction of the force on in the
figure below, given that

and

. (b) Calculate the magnitude
of the force on the charge , given that the square
is 10.0 cm on a side and

.

FIGURE 18.50 Point charges located at the corners of an
equilateral triangle 25.0 cm on a side.

50. (a) Find the electric field at the center of the

triangular configuration of charges in Figure 18.50,
,
given that

, and
. (b) Is there any combination of

charges, other than
produce a zero strength electric field at the center
of the triangular configuration?

, that will

18.8 Applications of Electrostatics

51. (a) What is the electric field 5.00 m from the

center of the terminal of a Van de Graaff with a
3.00 mC charge, noting that the field is equivalent
to that of a point charge at the center of the
terminal? (b) At this distance, what force does the
field exert on a
Graaff’s belt?

charge on the Van de

52. (a) What is the direction and magnitude of an

electric field that supports the weight of a free
electron near the surface of Earth? (b) Discuss
what the small value for this field implies
regarding the relative strength of the gravitational
and electrostatic forces.

FIGURE 18.49

46. (a) Using the symmetry of the arrangement,

determine the direction of the electric field at the
center of the square in Figure 18.49, given that
and

. (b)
Calculate the magnitude of the electric field at the
, given that the square is 5.00 cm on a
location of
side.

47. Find the electric field at the location of

in

Figure 18.49 given that

,

, and the square is 20.0 cm on a

side.

48. Find the total Coulomb force on the charge in

Figure 18.49, given that

,

,

,

,

. The square is 50.0 cm on a

and
side.

Access for free at openstax.org

53. A simple and common technique for accelerating
electrons is shown in Figure 18.51, where there is
a uniform electric field between two plates.
Electrons are released, usually from a hot
filament, near the negative plate, and there is a
small hole in the positive plate that allows the
electrons to continue moving. (a) Calculate the
acceleration of the electron if the field strength is
. (b) Explain why the electron will

not be pulled back to the positive plate once it
moves through the hole.

FIGURE 18.51 Parallel conducting plates with opposite
charges on them create a relatively uniform electric field
used to accelerate electrons to the right. Those that go
through the hole can be used to make a TV or computer
screen glow or to produce X-rays.

54. Earth has a net charge that produces an electric
field of approximately 150 N/C downward at its
surface. (a) What is the magnitude and sign of the
excess charge, noting the electric field of a
conducting sphere is equivalent to a point charge
at its center? (b) What acceleration will the field
produce on a free electron near Earth’s surface?
(c) What mass object with a single extra electron
will have its weight supported by this field?

55. Point charges of

and

are placed

0.500 m apart. (a) At what point along the line
between them is the electric field zero? (b) What is
the electric field halfway between them?

56. What can you say about two charges

, if
the electric field one-fourth of the way from to

and

is zero?

18 • Problems & Exercises

813

57. Integrated Concepts

of an electron

Calculate the angular velocity
orbiting a proton in the hydrogen atom, given the
radius of the orbit is
assume that the proton is stationary and the
centripetal force is supplied by Coulomb
attraction.

. You may

58. Integrated Concepts

An electron has an initial velocity of

in a uniform

strength electric field. The field accelerates the
electron in the direction opposite to its initial
velocity. (a) What is the direction of the electric
field? (b) How far does the electron travel before
coming to rest? (c) How long does it take the
electron to come to rest? (d) What is the electron’s
velocity when it returns to its starting point?

59. Integrated Concepts

The practical limit to an electric field in air is about

. Above this strength, sparking

takes place because air begins to ionize and
charges flow, reducing the field. (a) Calculate the
distance a free proton must travel in this field to
reach
of the speed of light, starting from
rest. (b) Is this practical in air, or must it occur in a
vacuum?

60. Integrated Concepts

A 5.00 g charged insulating ball hangs on a 30.0
cm long string in a uniform horizontal electric field
as shown in Figure 18.52. Given the charge on the
ball is

, find the strength of the field.

FIGURE 18.52 A horizontal electric field causes the charged
ball to hang at an angle of

.

814

18 • Problems & Exercises

61. Integrated Concepts

63. Integrated Concepts

(a) In Figure 18.55, four equal charges
corners of a square. A fifth charge

lie on the
is on a mass

directly above the center of the square, at a
height equal to the length of one side of the
square. Determine the magnitude of

in terms of

,

, and , if the Coulomb force is to equal the
. (b) Is this equilibrium stable or

weight of
unstable? Discuss.

FIGURE 18.55 Four equal charges on the corners of a
horizontal square support the weight of a fifth charge located
directly above the center of the square.

64. Unreasonable Results

(a) Calculate the electric field strength near a 10.0
cm diameter conducting sphere that has 1.00 C of
excess charge on it. (b) What is unreasonable
about this result? (c) Which assumptions are
responsible?

65. Unreasonable Results

(a) Two 0.500 g raindrops in a thunderhead are
1.00 cm apart when they each acquire 1.00 mC
charges. Find their acceleration. (b) What is
unreasonable about this result? (c) Which premise
or assumption is responsible?

66. Unreasonable Results

A wrecking yard inventor wants to pick up cars by
charging a 0.400 m diameter ball and inducing an
equal and opposite charge on the car. If a car has
a 1000 kg mass and the ball is to be able to lift it
from a distance of 1.00 m: (a) What minimum
charge must be used? (b) What is the electric field
near the surface of the ball? (c) Why are these
results unreasonable? (d) Which premise or
assumption is responsible?

Figure 18.53 shows an electron passing between two
charged metal plates that create an 100 N/C vertical
electric field perpendicular to the electron’s original
horizontal velocity. (These can be used to change the
electron’s direction, such as in an oscilloscope.) The
initial speed of the electron is
, and the
horizontal distance it travels in the uniform field is 4.00
cm. (a) What is its vertical deflection? (b) What is the
vertical component of its final velocity? (c) At what
angle does it exit? Neglect any edge effects.

62. Integrated Concepts

FIGURE 18.53

The classic Millikan oil drop experiment was the
first to obtain an accurate measurement of the
charge on an electron. In it, oil drops were
suspended against the gravitational force by a
vertical electric field. (See Figure 18.54.) Given the
oil drop to be
in radius and have a density
: (a) Find the weight of the drop. (b) If
of
the drop has a single excess electron, find the
electric field strength needed to balance its weight.

FIGURE 18.54 In the Millikan oil drop experiment, small
drops can be suspended in an electric field by the force
exerted on a single excess electron. Classically, this
experiment was used to determine the electron charge
measuring the electric field and mass of the drop.

by

Access for free at openstax.org

18 • Problems & Exercises

815

69. Critical Thinking A frictionless circular track with a
diameter of 4.00 m has two spheres of 10.0 kg
each anchored very near it. The track is oriented
with a diameter along the x-axis. The anchored
spheres are just outside the track. One of the
anchored spheres is just left of the origin at a
distance of
from it, and the other
is on the x-axis just right of the track at a distance
of
. Each sphere carries
a charge of
distance from the track is so the particles cannot
collide, and does not enter into the calculations
for three significant figures.) (a) A third sphere has
a mass of 10.00 kg and carries a charge of

. (Note: The slight

past

. It is free to move on the track. It

. What is the total

is initially placed an equal length from the two
anchored spheres at
force on the third sphere? (Be certain to include
gravity between the spheres.) (b) Will the third
sphere move? (c) Label the first two spheres A and
B, and the movable sphere C. Now start sphere C
. What are the forces on sphere C?
at
(d) Will sphere C now move? (e) If it does, where
will it stop moving and reverse course? If it does
not move, you may skip this part. (f) How many
equilibrium points are there on the track at which
the movable sphere will remain stationary? Where
are they?

67. Construct Your Own Problem

Consider two insulating balls with evenly
distributed equal and opposite charges on their
surfaces, held with a certain distance between the
centers of the balls. Construct a problem in which
you calculate the electric field (magnitude and
direction) due to the balls at various points along a
line running through the centers of the balls and
extending to infinity on either side. Choose
interesting points and comment on the meaning of
the field at those points. For example, at what
points might the field be just that due to one ball
and where does the field become negligibly small?
Among the things to be considered are the
magnitudes of the charges and the distance
between the centers of the balls. Your instructor
may wish for you to consider the electric field off
axis or for a more complex array of charges, such
as those in a water molecule.
68. Construct Your Own Problem

Consider identical spherical conducting space
ships in deep space where gravitational fields
from other bodies are negligible compared to the
gravitational attraction between the ships.
Construct a problem in which you place identical
excess charges on the space ships to exactly
counter their gravitational attraction. Calculate the
amount of excess charge needed. Examine
whether that charge depends on the distance
between the centers of the ships, the masses of
the ships, or any other factors. Discuss whether
this would be an easy, difficult, or even impossible
thing to do in practice.

