CHAPTER 22
Magnetism

FIGURE 22.1 The magnificent spectacle of the Aurora Borealis, or northern lights, glows in the northern sky above Bear Lake near Eielson
Air Force Base, Alaska. Shaped by the Earth’s magnetic field, this light is produced by radiation spewed from solar storms. (credit: Senior
Airman Joshua Strang, via Flickr)

CHAPTER OUTLINE

22.1 Magnets

22.2 Ferromagnets and Electromagnets

22.3 Magnetic Fields and Magnetic Field Lines

22.4 Magnetic Field Strength: Force on a Moving Charge in a Magnetic Field

22.5 Force on a Moving Charge in a Magnetic Field: Examples and Applications

22.6 The Hall Effect

22.7 Magnetic Force on a Current-Carrying Conductor

22.8 Torque on a Current Loop: Motors and Meters

22.9 Magnetic Fields Produced by Currents: Ampere’s Law

22.10 Magnetic Force between Two Parallel Conductors

22.11 More Applications of Magnetism

INTRODUCTION TO MAGNETISM
Through the kitchen window, the Aurora Borealis glows in the night sky. This grand spectacle is shaped by the same
force that holds the note to the refrigerator.

One evening, an Alaskan sticks a note to his refrigerator with a small magnet.

People have been aware of magnets and magnetism for thousands of years. The earliest records date to well before
the time of Christ, particularly in a region of Asia Minor called Magnesia (the name of this region is the source of
words like magnetic). Magnetic rocks found in Magnesia, which is now part of western Turkey, stimulated interest
during ancient times. A practical application for magnets was found later, when they were employed as navigational
compasses. The use of magnets in compasses resulted not only in improved long-distance sailing, but also in the
names of “north” and “south” being given to the two types of magnetic poles.

954

22 • Magnetism

Today magnetism plays many important roles in our lives. Physicists’ understanding of magnetism has enabled the
development of technologies that affect our everyday lives. The iPod in your purse or backpack, for example,
wouldn’t have been possible without the applications of magnetism and electricity on a small scale.

The discovery that weak changes in a magnetic field in a thin film of iron and chromium could bring about much
larger changes in electrical resistance was one of the first large successes of nanotechnology. The 2007 Nobel Prize
in Physics went to Albert Fert from France and Peter Grunberg from Germany for this discovery of giant
magnetoresistanceand its applications to computer memory.

All electric motors, with uses as diverse as powering refrigerators, starting cars, and moving elevators, contain
magnets. Generators, whether producing hydroelectric power or running bicycle lights, use magnetic fields.
Recycling facilities employ magnets to separate iron from other refuse. Hundreds of millions of dollars are spent
annually on magnetic containment of fusion as a future energy source. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) has
become an important diagnostic tool in the field of medicine, and the use of magnetism to explore brain activity is a
subject of contemporary research and development. The list of applications also includes computer hard drives,
tape recording, detection of inhaled asbestos, and levitation of high-speed trains. Magnetism is used to explain
atomic energy levels, cosmic rays, and charged particles trapped in the Van Allen belts. Once again, we will find all
these disparate phenomena are linked by a small number of underlying physical principles.

FIGURE 22.2 Engineering of technology like iPods would not be possible without a deep understanding magnetism. (credit: Jesse! S?,
Flickr)

Click to view content (https://openstax.org/books/college-physics-2e/pages/22-introduction-to-magnetism)
22.1 Magnets

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

• Describe the difference between the north and south poles of a magnet.
• Describe how magnetic poles interact with each other.

FIGURE 22.3 Magnets come in various shapes, sizes, and strengths. All have both a north pole and a south pole. There is never an isolated
pole (a monopole).

All magnets attract iron, such as that in a refrigerator door. However, magnets may attract or repel other magnets.
Experimentation shows that all magnets have two poles. If freely suspended, one pole will point toward the north.

Access for free at openstax.org

22.1 • Magnets

955

The two poles are thus named the north magnetic pole and the south magnetic pole (or more properly, north-
seeking and south-seeking poles, for the attractions in those directions).

Universal Characteristics of Magnets and Magnetic Poles

It is a universal characteristic of all magnets that like poles repel and unlike poles attract. (Note the similarity
with electrostatics: unlike charges attract and like charges repel.)

Further experimentation shows that it is impossible to separate north and south polesin the manner that + and
− charges can be separated.

FIGURE 22.4 One end of a bar magnet is suspended from a thread that points toward north. The magnet’s two poles are labeled N and S for
north-seeking and south-seeking poles, respectively.

Misconception Alert: Earth’s Magnetic Poles

Earth acts like a very large bar magnet with its south-seeking pole near the geographic North Pole. That is why
the north pole of your compass is attracted toward the geographic north pole of Earth—because the magnetic
pole that is near the geographic North Pole is actually a south magnetic pole! Confusion arises because the
geographic term “North Pole” has come to be used (incorrectly) for the magnetic pole that is near the North
Pole. Thus, “north magnetic pole” is actually a misnomer—it should be called the south magnetic pole.

FIGURE 22.5 Unlike poles attract, whereas like poles repel.

956

22 • Magnetism

FIGURE 22.6 North and south poles always occur in pairs. Attempts to separate them result in more pairs of poles. If we continue to split
the magnet, we will eventually get down to an iron atom with a north pole and a south pole—these, too, cannot be separated.

The fact that magnetic poles always occur in pairs of north and south is true from the very large scale—for example,
sunspots always occur in pairs that are north and south magnetic poles—all the way down to the very small scale.
Magnetic atoms have both a north pole and a south pole, as do many types of subatomic particles, such as
electrons, protons, and neutrons.

Making Connections: Take-Home Experiment—Refrigerator Magnets

We know that like magnetic poles repel and unlike poles attract. See if you can show this for two refrigerator
magnets. Will the magnets stick if you turn them over? Why do they stick to the door anyway? What can you say
about the magnetic properties of the door next to the magnet? Do refrigerator magnets stick to metal or plastic
spoons? Do they stick to all types of metal?

22.2 Ferromagnets and Electromagnets

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

• Define ferromagnet.
• Describe the role of magnetic domains in magnetization.
• Explain the significance of the Curie temperature.
• Describe the relationship between electricity and magnetism.

Ferromagnets

Only certain materials, such as iron, cobalt, nickel, and gadolinium, exhibit strong magnetic effects. Such materials
are called ferromagnetic, after the Latin word for iron, ferrum. A group of materials made from the alloys of the rare
earth elements are also used as strong and permanent magnets; a popular one is neodymium. Other materials
exhibit weak magnetic effects, which are detectable only with sensitive instruments. Not only do ferromagnetic
materials respond strongly to magnets (the way iron is attracted to magnets), they can also be magnetized
themselves—that is, they can be induced to be magnetic or made into permanent magnets.

Access for free at openstax.org

22.2 • Ferromagnets and Electromagnets

957

FIGURE 22.7 An unmagnetized piece of iron is placed between two magnets, heated, and then cooled, or simply tapped when cold. The
iron becomes a permanent magnet with the poles aligned as shown: its south pole is adjacent to the north pole of the original magnet, and
its north pole is adjacent to the south pole of the original magnet. Note that there are attractive forces between the magnets.

When a magnet is brought near a previously unmagnetized ferromagnetic material, it causes local magnetization of
the material with unlike poles closest, as in Figure 22.7. (This results in the attraction of the previously
unmagnetized material to the magnet.) What happens on a microscopic scale is illustrated in Figure 22.8. The
regions within the material called domains act like small bar magnets. Within domains, the poles of individual atoms
are aligned. Each atom acts like a tiny bar magnet. Domains are small and randomly oriented in an unmagnetized
ferromagnetic object. In response to an external magnetic field, the domains may grow to millimeter size, aligning
themselves as shown in Figure 22.8(b). This induced magnetization can be made permanent if the material is
heated and then cooled, or simply tapped in the presence of other magnets.

FIGURE 22.8 (a) An unmagnetized piece of iron (or other ferromagnetic material) has randomly oriented domains. (b) When magnetized by
an external field, the domains show greater alignment, and some grow at the expense of others. Individual atoms are aligned within
domains; each atom acts like a tiny bar magnet.

Conversely, a permanent magnet can be demagnetized by hard blows or by heating it in the absence of another
magnet. Increased thermal motion at higher temperature can disrupt and randomize the orientation and the size of
the domains. There is a well-defined temperature for ferromagnetic materials, which is called the Curie
temperature, above which they cannot be magnetized. The Curie temperature for iron is 1043 K
well above room temperature. There are several elements and alloys that have Curie temperatures much lower than
room temperature and are ferromagnetic only below those temperatures.

, which is

Electromagnets

Early in the 19th century, it was discovered that electrical currents cause magnetic effects. The first significant
observation was by the Danish scientist Hans Christian Oersted (1777–1851), who found that a compass needle
was deflected by a current-carrying wire. This was the first significant evidence that the movement of charges had
any connection with magnets. Electromagnetism is the use of electric current to make magnets. These temporarily
induced magnets are called electromagnets. Electromagnets are employed for everything from a wrecking yard
crane that lifts scrapped cars to controlling the beam of a 90-km-circumference particle accelerator to the magnets
in medical imaging machines (See Figure 22.9).

958

22 • Magnetism

FIGURE 22.9 Instrument for magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). The device uses a superconducting cylindrical coil for the main magnetic
field. The patient goes into this “tunnel” on the gurney. (credit: Bill McChesney, Flickr)

Figure 22.10 shows that the response of iron filings to a current-carrying coil and to a permanent bar magnet. The
patterns are similar. In fact, electromagnets and ferromagnets have the same basic characteristics—for example,
they have north and south poles that cannot be separated and for which like poles repel and unlike poles attract.

FIGURE 22.10 Iron filings near (a) a current-carrying coil and (b) a magnet act like tiny compass needles, showing the shape of their fields.
Their response to a current-carrying coil and a permanent magnet is seen to be very similar, especially near the ends of the coil and the
magnet.

Combining a ferromagnet with an electromagnet can produce particularly strong magnetic effects. (See Figure
22.11.) Whenever strong magnetic effects are needed, such as lifting scrap metal, or in particle accelerators,
electromagnets are enhanced by ferromagnetic materials. Limits to how strong the magnets can be made are
imposed by coil resistance (it will overheat and melt at sufficiently high current), and so superconducting magnets
may be employed. These are still limited, because superconducting properties are destroyed by too great a
magnetic field.

FIGURE 22.11 An electromagnet with a ferromagnetic core can produce very strong magnetic effects. Alignment of domains in the core
produces a magnet, the poles of which are aligned with the electromagnet.

Access for free at openstax.org

22.2 • Ferromagnets and Electromagnets

959

Figure 22.12 shows a few uses of combinations of electromagnets and ferromagnets. Ferromagnetic materials can
act as memory devices, because the orientation of the magnetic fields of small domains can be reversed or erased.
Magnetic information storage on videotapes and computer hard drives are among the most common applications.
This property is vital in our digital world.

FIGURE 22.12 An electromagnet induces regions of permanent magnetism on a floppy disk coated with a ferromagnetic material. The
information stored here is digital (a region is either magnetic or not); in other applications, it can be analog (with a varying strength), such as
on audiotapes.

Current: The Source of All Magnetism

An electromagnet creates magnetism with an electric current. In later sections we explore this more quantitatively,
finding the strength and direction of magnetic fields created by various currents. But what about ferromagnets?
Figure 22.13 shows models of how electric currents create magnetism at the submicroscopic level. (Note that we
cannot directly observe the paths of individual electrons about atoms, and so a model or visual image, consistent
with all direct observations, is made. We can directly observe the electron’s orbital angular momentum, its spin
momentum, and subsequent magnetic moments, all of which are explained with electric-current-creating
subatomic magnetism.) Currents, including those associated with other submicroscopic particles like protons, allow
us to explain ferromagnetism and all other magnetic effects. Ferromagnetism, for example, results from an internal
cooperative alignment of electron spins, possible in some materials but not in others.

Crucial to the statement that electric current is the source of all magnetism is the fact that it is impossible to
separate north and south magnetic poles. (This is far different from the case of positive and negative charges, which
are easily separated.) A current loop always produces a magnetic dipole—that is, a magnetic field that acts like a
north pole and south pole pair. Since isolated north and south magnetic poles, called magnetic monopoles, are not
observed, currents are used to explain all magnetic effects. If magnetic monopoles did exist, then we would have to
modify this underlying connection that all magnetism is due to electrical current. There is no known reason that
magnetic monopoles should not exist—they are simply never observed—and so searches at the subnuclear level
continue. If they do notexist, we would like to find out why not. If they doexist, we would like to see evidence of
them.

960

22 • Magnetism

Electric Currents and Magnetism

Electric current is the source of all magnetism.

FIGURE 22.13 (a) In the planetary model of the atom, an electron orbits a nucleus, forming a closed-current loop and producing a magnetic
field with a north pole and a south pole. (b) Electrons have spin and can be crudely pictured as rotating charge, forming a current that
produces a magnetic field with a north pole and a south pole. Neither the planetary model nor the image of a spinning electron is
completely consistent with modern physics. However, they do provide a useful way of understanding phenomena.

PHET EXPLORATIONS

Magnets and Electromagnets
Explore the interactions between a compass and bar magnet. Discover how you can use a battery and wire to make
a magnet! Can you make it a stronger magnet? Can you make the magnetic field reverse?

Click to view content (https://openstax.org/l/28elec_magnet).

22.3 Magnetic Fields and Magnetic Field Lines

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

• Define magnetic field and describe the magnetic field lines of various magnetic fields.

Einstein is said to have been fascinated by a compass as a child, perhaps musing on how the needle felt a force
without direct physical contact. His ability to think deeply and clearly about action at a distance, particularly for
gravitational, electric, and magnetic forces, later enabled him to create his revolutionary theory of relativity. Since
magnetic forces act at a distance, we define a magnetic field to represent magnetic forces. The pictorial
representation of magnetic field lines is very useful in visualizing the strength and direction of the magnetic field.
As shown in Figure 22.14, the direction of magnetic field lines is defined to be the direction in which the north end
of a compass needle points. The magnetic field is traditionally called the B-field.

FIGURE 22.14 Magnetic field lines are defined to have the direction that a small compass points when placed at a location. (a) If small
compasses are used to map the magnetic field around a bar magnet, they will point in the directions shown: away from the north pole of the
magnet, toward the south pole of the magnet. (Recall that the Earth’s north magnetic pole is really a south pole in terms of definitions of
poles on a bar magnet.) (b) Connecting the arrows gives continuous magnetic field lines. The strength of the field is proportional to the

Access for free at openstax.org

22.4 • Magnetic Field Strength: Force on a Moving Charge in a Magnetic Field

961

closeness (or density) of the lines. (c) If the interior of the magnet could be probed, the field lines would be found to form continuous
closed loops.

Small compasses used to test a magnetic field will not disturb it. (This is analogous to the way we tested electric
fields with a small test charge. In both cases, the fields represent only the object creating them and not the probe
testing them.) Figure 22.15 shows how the magnetic field appears for a current loop and a long straight wire, as
could be explored with small compasses. A small compass placed in these fields will align itself parallel to the field
line at its location, with its north pole pointing in the direction of B. Note the symbols used for field into and out of
the paper.

FIGURE 22.15 Small compasses could be used to map the fields shown here. (a) The magnetic field of a circular current loop is similar to
that of a bar magnet. (b) A long and straight wire creates a field with magnetic field lines forming circular loops. (c) When the wire is in the
plane of the paper, the field is perpendicular to the paper. Note that the symbols used for the field pointing inward (like the tail of an arrow)
and the field pointing outward (like the tip of an arrow).

Making Connections: Concept of a Field

A field is a way of mapping forces surrounding any object that can act on another object at a distance without
apparent physical connection. The field represents the object generating it. Gravitational fields map gravitational
forces, electric fields map electrical forces, and magnetic fields map magnetic forces.

Extensive exploration of magnetic fields has revealed a number of hard-and-fast rules. We use magnetic field lines
to represent the field (the lines are a pictorial tool, not a physical entity in and of themselves). The properties of
magnetic field lines can be summarized by these rules:

1. The direction of the magnetic field is tangent to the field line at any point in space. A small compass will point in

the direction of the field line.

2. The strength of the field is proportional to the closeness of the lines. It is exactly proportional to the number of

lines per unit area perpendicular to the lines (called the areal density).

3. Magnetic field lines can never cross, meaning that the field is unique at any point in space.
4. Magnetic field lines are continuous, forming closed loops without beginning or end. They go from the north pole

to the south pole.

The last property is related to the fact that the north and south poles cannot be separated. It is a distinct difference
from electric field lines, which begin and end on the positive and negative charges. If magnetic monopoles existed,
then magnetic field lines would begin and end on them.

22.4 Magnetic Field Strength: Force on a Moving Charge in a Magnetic Field

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

• Describe the effects of magnetic fields on moving charges.
• Use the right hand rule 1 to determine the velocity of a charge, the direction of the magnetic field, and the

direction of the magnetic force on a moving charge.

• Calculate the magnetic force on a moving charge.

What is the mechanism by which one magnet exerts a force on another? The answer is related to the fact that all
magnetism is caused by current, the flow of charge. Magnetic fields exert forces on moving charges, and so they

962

22 • Magnetism

exert forces on other magnets, all of which have moving charges.

Right Hand Rule 1

The magnetic force on a moving charge is one of the most fundamental known. Magnetic force is as important as the
electrostatic or Coulomb force. Yet the magnetic force is more complex, in both the number of factors that affects it
and in its direction, than the relatively simple Coulomb force. The magnitude of the magnetic force
moving at a speed in a magnetic field of strength

on a charge

is given by

22.1

where is the angle between the directions of and
how we define the magnetic field strength —in terms of the force on a charged particle moving in a magnetic field.
The SI unit for magnetic field strength
is called the tesla (T) after the eccentric but brilliant inventor Nikola Tesla
(1856–1943). To determine how the tesla relates to other SI units, we solve

This force is often called the Lorentz force. In fact, this is

for

.

Because

is unitless, the tesla is

(note that C/s = A).

22.2

22.3

Another smaller unit, called the gauss (G), where
magnets have fields near 2 T; superconducting electromagnets may attain 10 T or more. The Earth’s magnetic field
on its surface is only about

, is sometimes used. The strongest permanent

, or 0.5 G.

is perpendicular to the plane formed by and , as determined by the right

The directionof the magnetic force
hand rule 1 (or RHR-1), which is illustrated in Figure 22.16. RHR-1 states that, to determine the direction of the
magnetic force on a positive moving charge, you point the thumb of the right hand in the direction of
the direction of
there is one velocity, and so the thumb represents it. There are many field lines, and so the fingers represent them.
The force is in the direction you would push with your palm. The force on a negative charge is in exactly the opposite
direction to that on a positive charge.

, and a perpendicular to the palm points in the direction of

. One way to remember this is that

, the fingers in

FIGURE 22.16 Magnetic fields exert forces on moving charges. This force is one of the most basic known. The direction of the magnetic
force on a moving charge is perpendicular to the plane formed by and
of the force is proportional to ,

and follows right hand rule–1 (RHR-1) as shown. The magnitude

, and the sine of the angle between and .

,

Access for free at openstax.org

22.4 • Magnetic Field Strength: Force on a Moving Charge in a Magnetic Field

963

Making Connections: Charges and Magnets

There is no magnetic force on static charges. However, there is a magnetic force on moving charges. When
charges are stationary, their electric fields do not affect magnets. But, when charges move, they produce
magnetic fields that exert forces on other magnets. When there is relative motion, a connection between electric
and magnetic fields emerges—each affects the other.

EXAMPLE 22.1

Calculating Magnetic Force: Earth’s Magnetic Field on a Charged Glass Rod
With the exception of compasses, you seldom see or personally experience forces due to the Earth’s small magnetic
field. To illustrate this, suppose that in a physics lab you rub a glass rod with silk, placing a 20-nC positive charge on
it. Calculate the force on the rod due to the Earth’s magnetic field, if you throw it with a horizontal velocity of 10 m/s
due west in a place where the Earth’s field is due north parallel to the ground. (The direction of the force is
determined with right hand rule 1 as shown in Figure 22.17.)

FIGURE 22.17 A positively charged object moving due west in a region where the Earth’s magnetic field is due north experiences a force
that is straight down as shown. A negative charge moving in the same direction would feel a force straight up.

Strategy

We are given the charge, its velocity, and the magnetic field strength and direction. We can thus use the equation

to find the force.

Solution

The magnetic force is

We see that
given quantities yields

, since the angle between the velocity and the direction of the field is

22.4

. Entering the other

22.5

Discussion

This force is completely negligible on any macroscopic object, consistent with experience. (It is calculated to only
one digit, since the Earth’s field varies with location and is given to only one digit.) The Earth’s magnetic field,
however, does produce very important effects, particularly on submicroscopic particles. Some of these are explored

964

22 • Magnetism

in Force on a Moving Charge in a Magnetic Field: Examples and Applications.

22.5 Force on a Moving Charge in a Magnetic Field: Examples and
Applications

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

• Describe the effects of a magnetic field on a moving charge.
• Calculate the radius of curvature of the path of a charge that is moving in a magnetic field.

Magnetic force can cause a charged particle to move in a circular or spiral path. Cosmic rays are energetic charged
particles in outer space, some of which approach the Earth. They can be forced into spiral paths by the Earth’s
magnetic field. Protons in giant accelerators are kept in a circular path by magnetic force. The bubble chamber
photograph in Figure 22.18 shows charged particles moving in such curved paths. The curved paths of charged
particles in magnetic fields are the basis of a number of phenomena and can even be used analytically, such as in a
mass spectrometer.

FIGURE 22.18 Trails of bubbles are produced by high-energy charged particles moving through the superheated liquid hydrogen in this
artist’s rendition of a bubble chamber. There is a strong magnetic field perpendicular to the page that causes the curved paths of the
particles. The radius of the path can be used to find the mass, charge, and energy of the particle.

So does the magnetic force cause circular motion? Magnetic force is always perpendicular to velocity, so that it does
no work on the charged particle. The particle’s kinetic energy and speed thus remain constant. The direction of
motion is affected, but not the speed. This is typical of uniform circular motion. The simplest case occurs when a
charged particle moves perpendicular to a uniform -field, such as shown in Figure 22.19. (If this takes place in a
vacuum, the magnetic field is the dominant factor determining the motion.) Here, the magnetic force supplies the
centripetal force

, we see that

. Noting that

.

Access for free at openstax.org

22.5 • Force on a Moving Charge in a Magnetic Field: Examples and Applications

965

FIGURE 22.19 A negatively charged particle moves in the plane of the page in a region where the magnetic field is perpendicular into the
page (represented by the small circles with x’s—like the tails of arrows). The magnetic force is perpendicular to the velocity, and so velocity
changes in direction but not magnitude. Uniform circular motion results.

Because the magnetic force

supplies the centripetal force

, we have

Solving for yields

22.6

22.7

is the radius of curvature of the path of a charged particle with mass

Here,
perpendicular to a magnetic field of strength . If the velocity is not perpendicular to the magnetic field, then is
the component of the velocity perpendicular to the field. The component of the velocity parallel to the field is
unaffected, since the magnetic force is zero for motion parallel to the field. This produces a spiral motion rather than
a circular one.

and charge , moving at a speed

EXAMPLE 22.2

Calculating the Curvature of the Path of an Electron Moving in a Magnetic Field: A Magnet on
a TV Screen
A magnet brought near an old-fashioned TV screen such as in Figure 22.20 (TV sets with cathode ray tubes instead
of LCD screens) severely distorts its picture by altering the path of the electrons that make its phosphors glow.
(Don’t try this at home, as it will permanently magnetize and ruin the TV.)To illustrate this, calculate the radius
of curvature of the path of an electron having a velocity of
of about 10.0 kV used in some TVs) perpendicular to a magnetic field of strength
permanent magnets).

(corresponding to the accelerating voltage

(obtainable with

966

22 • Magnetism

FIGURE 22.20 Side view showing what happens when a magnet comes in contact with a computer monitor or TV screen. Electrons moving
toward the screen spiral about magnetic field lines, maintaining the component of their velocity parallel to the field lines. This distorts the
image on the screen.

Strategy

We can find the radius of curvature directly from the equation

, since all other quantities in it are given or

known.

Solution

Using known values for the mass and charge of an electron, along with the given values of and

gives us

or

Discussion

22.8

22.9

The small radius indicates a large effect. The electrons in the TV picture tube are made to move in very tight circles,
greatly altering their paths and distorting the image.

Figure 22.21 shows how electrons not moving perpendicular to magnetic field lines follow the field lines. The
component of velocity parallel to the lines is unaffected, and so the charges spiral along the field lines. If field
strength increases in the direction of motion, the field will exert a force to slow the charges, forming a kind of
magnetic mirror, as shown below.

FIGURE 22.21 When a charged particle moves along a magnetic field line into a region where the field becomes stronger, the particle
experiences a force that reduces the component of velocity parallel to the field. This force slows the motion along the field line and here

Access for free at openstax.org

22.5 • Force on a Moving Charge in a Magnetic Field: Examples and Applications

967

reverses it, forming a “magnetic mirror.”

The properties of charged particles in magnetic fields are related to such different things as the Aurora Australis or
Aurora Borealis and particle accelerators. Charged particles approaching magnetic field lines may get trapped in
spiral orbits about the lines rather than crossing them, as seen above. Some cosmic rays, for example, follow the
Earth’s magnetic field lines, entering the atmosphere near the magnetic poles and causing the southern or northern
lights through their ionization of molecules in the atmosphere. This glow of energized atoms and molecules is seen
in Introduction to Magnetism. Those particles that approach middle latitudes must cross magnetic field lines, and
many are prevented from penetrating the atmosphere. Cosmic rays are a component of background radiation;
consequently, they give a higher radiation dose at the poles than at the equator.

FIGURE 22.22 Energetic electrons and protons, components of cosmic rays, from the Sun and deep outer space often follow the Earth’s
magnetic field lines rather than cross them. (Recall that the Earth’s north magnetic pole is really a south pole in terms of a bar magnet.)

Some incoming charged particles become trapped in the Earth’s magnetic field, forming two belts above the
atmosphere known as the Van Allen radiation belts after the discoverer James A. Van Allen, an American
astrophysicist. (See Figure 22.23.) Particles trapped in these belts form radiation fields (similar to nuclear radiation)
so intense that piloted space flights avoid them and satellites with sensitive electronics are kept out of them. In the
few minutes it took lunar missions to cross the Van Allen radiation belts, astronauts received radiation doses more
than twice the allowed annual exposure for radiation workers. Other planets have similar belts, especially those
having strong magnetic fields like Jupiter.

FIGURE 22.23 The Van Allen radiation belts are two regions in which energetic charged particles are trapped in the Earth’s magnetic field.
One belt lies about 300 km above the Earth’s surface, the other about 16,000 km. Charged particles in these belts migrate along magnetic
field lines and are partially reflected away from the poles by the stronger fields there. The charged particles that enter the atmosphere are
replenished by the Sun and sources in deep outer space.

Back on Earth, we have devices that employ magnetic fields to contain charged particles. Among them are the giant
particle accelerators that have been used to explore the substructure of matter. (See Figure 22.24.) Magnetic fields

968

22 • Magnetism

not only control the direction of the charged particles, they also are used to focus particles into beams and
overcome the repulsion of like charges in these beams.

FIGURE 22.24 The Fermilab facility in Illinois has a large particle accelerator (the most powerful in the world until 2008) that employs
magnetic fields (magnets seen here in orange) to contain and direct its beam. This and other accelerators have been in use for several
decades and have allowed us to discover some of the laws underlying all matter. (credit: ammcrim, Flickr)

Thermonuclear fusion (like that occurring in the Sun) is a hope for a future clean energy source. One of the most
promising devices is the tokamak, which uses magnetic fields to contain (or trap) and direct the reactive charged
particles. (See Figure 22.25.) Less exotic, but more immediately practical, amplifiers in microwave ovens use a
magnetic field to contain oscillating electrons. These oscillating electrons generate the microwaves sent into the
oven.

FIGURE 22.25 Tokamaks such as the one shown in the figure are being studied with the goal of economical production of energy by nuclear
fusion. Magnetic fields in the doughnut-shaped device contain and direct the reactive charged particles. (credit: David Mellis, Flickr)

Mass spectrometers have a variety of designs, and many use magnetic fields to measure mass. The curvature of a
charged particle’s path in the field is related to its mass and is measured to obtain mass information. (See More
Applications of Magnetism.) Historically, such techniques were employed in the first direct observations of electron
charge and mass. Today, mass spectrometers (sometimes coupled with gas chromatographs) are used to determine
the make-up and sequencing of large biological molecules.

22.6 The Hall Effect

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

• Describe the Hall effect.
• Calculate the Hall emf across a current-carrying conductor.

Access for free at openstax.org

22.6 • The Hall Effect

969

We have seen effects of a magnetic field on free-moving charges. The magnetic field also affects charges moving in
a conductor. One result is the Hall effect, which has important implications and applications.

Figure 22.26 shows what happens to charges moving through a conductor in a magnetic field. The field is
perpendicular to the electron drift velocity and to the width of the conductor. Note that conventional current is to the
right in both parts of the figure. In part (a), electrons carry the current and move to the left. In part (b), positive
charges carry the current and move to the right. Moving electrons feel a magnetic force toward one side of the
conductor, leaving a net positive charge on the other side. This separation of charge creates a voltage , known as
the Hall emf, acrossthe conductor. The creation of a voltage acrossa current-carrying conductor by a magnetic field
is known as the Hall effect, after Edwin Hall, the American physicist who discovered it in 1879.

FIGURE 22.26 The Hall effect. (a) Electrons move to the left in this flat conductor (conventional current to the right). The magnetic field is
directly out of the page, represented by circled dots; it exerts a force on the moving charges, causing a voltage , the Hall emf, across the
conductor. (b) Positive charges moving to the right (conventional current also to the right) are moved to the side, producing a Hall emf of the
opposite sign,
effect.

. Thus, if the direction of the field and current are known, the sign of the charge carriers can be determined from the Hall

One very important use of the Hall effect is to determine whether positive or negative charges carries the current.
Note that in Figure 22.26(b), where positive charges carry the current, the Hall emf has the sign opposite to when
negative charges carry the current. Historically, the Hall effect was used to show that electrons carry current in
metals and it also shows that positive charges carry current in some semiconductors. The Hall effect is used today
as a research tool to probe the movement of charges, their drift velocities and densities, and so on, in materials. In
1980, it was discovered that the Hall effect is quantized, an example of quantum behavior in a macroscopic object.

The Hall effect has other uses that range from the determination of blood flow rate to precision measurement of
magnetic field strength. To examine these quantitatively, we need an expression for the Hall emf,
conductor. Consider the balance of forces on a moving charge in a situation where ,
perpendicular, such as shown in Figure 22.27. Although the magnetic force moves negative charges to one side,
they cannot build up without limit. The electric field caused by their separation opposes the magnetic force,

, and are mutually

, across a

, and the electric force,

, eventually grows to equal it. That is,

or

22.10

22.11

Note that the electric field
conductor. For a uniform electric field, the relationship between electric field and voltage is
width of the conductor and is the Hall emf. Entering this into the last expression gives

is uniform across the conductor because the magnetic field

is uniform, as is the

, where is the

Solving this for the Hall emf yields

22.12

22.13

970

22 • Magnetism

where is the Hall effect voltage across a conductor of width through which charges move at a speed .

FIGURE 22.27 The Hall emf produces an electric force that balances the magnetic force on the moving charges. The magnetic force
produces charge separation, which builds up until it is balanced by the electric force, an equilibrium that is quickly reached.

One of the most common uses of the Hall effect is in the measurement of magnetic field strength . Such devices,
called Hall probes, can be made very small, allowing fine position mapping. Hall probes can also be made very
accurate, usually accomplished by careful calibration. Another application of the Hall effect is to measure fluid flow
in any fluid that has free charges (most do). (See Figure 22.28.) A magnetic field applied perpendicular to the flow
direction produces a Hall emf as shown. Note that the sign of depends not on the sign of the charges, but only on
the directions of
average velocity

and . The magnitude of the Hall emf is
can be determined from providing the other factors are known.

, where is the pipe diameter, so that the

FIGURE 22.28 The Hall effect can be used to measure fluid flow in any fluid having free charges, such as blood. The Hall emf
across the tube perpendicular to the applied magnetic field and is proportional to the average velocity .

is measured

EXAMPLE 22.3

Calculating the Hall emf: Hall Effect for Blood Flow
A Hall effect flow probe is placed on an artery, applying a 0.100-T magnetic field across it, in a setup similar to that
in Figure 22.28. What is the Hall emf, given the vessel’s inside diameter is 4.00 mm and the average blood velocity is
20.0 cm/s?

Strategy

Because ,

, and are mutually perpendicular, the equation

can be used to find .

Access for free at openstax.org

22.7 • Magnetic Force on a Current-Carrying Conductor

971

Solution

Entering the given values for

,

, and gives

22.14

Discussion

This is the average voltage output. Instantaneous voltage varies with pulsating blood flow. The voltage is small in
this type of measurement.
is particularly difficult to measure, because there are voltages associated with heart
action (ECG voltages) that are on the order of millivolts. In practice, this difficulty is overcome by applying an AC
magnetic field, so that the Hall emf is AC with the same frequency. An amplifier can be very selective in picking out
only the appropriate frequency, eliminating signals and noise at other frequencies.

22.7 Magnetic Force on a Current-Carrying Conductor

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

• Describe the effects of a magnetic force on a current-carrying conductor.
• Calculate the magnetic force on a current-carrying conductor.

Because charges ordinarily cannot escape a conductor, the magnetic force on charges moving in a conductor is
transmitted to the conductor itself.

FIGURE 22.29 The magnetic field exerts a force on a current-carrying wire in a direction given by the right hand rule 1 (the same direction
as that on the individual moving charges). This force can easily be large enough to move the wire, since typical currents consist of very large
numbers of moving charges.

is given by

We can derive an expression for the magnetic force on a current by taking a sum of the magnetic forces on individual
charges. (The forces add because they are in the same direction.) The force on an individual charge moving at the
drift velocity
total magnetic force on the wire is then
section of wire of length . Now,
volume of wire in the field. Noting that
wire is

, where is the number of charge carriers per unit volume and

to be uniform over a length of wire and zero elsewhere, the

is the cross-sectional area of the wire, then the force on the

is the number of charge carriers in the

. Gathering terms,

. Taking

, where

, where

is the

Because

(see Current),

22.15

22.16

is the equation for magnetic force on a length of wire carrying a current in a uniform magnetic field , as shown
in Figure 22.30. If we divide both sides of this expression by , we find that the magnetic force per unit length of wire
in a uniform field is

. The direction of this force is given by RHR-1, with the thumb in the direction of

972

22 • Magnetism

the current
in Figure 22.30.

. Then, with the fingers in the direction of

, a perpendicular to the palm points in the direction of

, as

FIGURE 22.30 The force on a current-carrying wire in a magnetic field is

. Its direction is given by RHR-1.

EXAMPLE 22.4

Calculating Magnetic Force on a Current-Carrying Wire: A Strong Magnetic Field
Calculate the force on the wire shown in Figure 22.29, given

, and

,

.

Strategy

The force can be found with the given information by using

and noting that the angle between and

is

, so that

.

Solution

Entering the given values into

yields

The units for tesla are

; thus,

Discussion

22.17

22.18

This large magnetic field creates a significant force on a small length of wire.

Magnetic force on current-carrying conductors is used to convert electric energy to work. (Motors are a prime
example—they employ loops of wire and are considered in the next section.) Magnetohydrodynamics (MHD) is the
technical name given to a clever application where magnetic force pumps fluids without moving mechanical parts.
(See Figure 22.31.)

Access for free at openstax.org

22.8 • Torque on a Current Loop: Motors and Meters

973

FIGURE 22.31 Magnetohydrodynamics. The magnetic force on the current passed through this fluid can be used as a nonmechanical pump.

A strong magnetic field is applied across a tube and a current is passed through the fluid at right angles to the field,
resulting in a force on the fluid parallel to the tube axis as shown. The absence of moving parts makes this attractive
for moving a hot, chemically active substance, such as the liquid sodium employed in some nuclear reactors.
Experimental artificial hearts are testing with this technique for pumping blood, perhaps circumventing the adverse
effects of mechanical pumps. (Cell membranes, however, are affected by the large fields needed in MHD, delaying
its practical application in humans.) MHD propulsion for nuclear submarines has been proposed, because it could be
considerably quieter than conventional propeller drives. The deterrent value of nuclear submarines is based on their
ability to hide and survive a first or second nuclear strike. As we slowly disassemble our nuclear weapons arsenals,
the submarine branch will be the last to be decommissioned because of this ability (See Figure 22.32.) Existing MHD
drives are heavy and inefficient—much development work is needed.

FIGURE 22.32 An MHD propulsion system in a nuclear submarine could produce significantly less turbulence than propellers and allow it to
run more silently. The development of a silent drive submarine was dramatized in the book and the film The Hunt for Red October.

22.8 Torque on a Current Loop: Motors and Meters

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

• Describe how motors and meters work in terms of torque on a current loop.
• Calculate the torque on a current-carrying loop in a magnetic field.

Motors are the most common application of magnetic force on current-carrying wires. Motors have loops of wire in a
magnetic field. When current is passed through the loops, the magnetic field exerts torque on the loops, which
rotates a shaft. Electrical energy is converted to mechanical work in the process. (See Figure 22.33.)

974

22 • Magnetism

FIGURE 22.33 Torque on a current loop. A current-carrying loop of wire attached to a vertically rotating shaft feels magnetic forces that
produce a clockwise torque as viewed from above.

Let us examine the force on each segment of the loop in Figure 22.33 to find the torques produced about the axis of
the vertical shaft. (This will lead to a useful equation for the torque on the loop.) We take the magnetic field to be
uniform over the rectangular loop, which has width
and height . First, we note that the forces on the top and
bottom segments are vertical and, therefore, parallel to the shaft, producing no torque. Those vertical forces are
equal in magnitude and opposite in direction, so that they also produce no net force on the loop. Figure 22.34 shows
views of the loop from above. Torque is defined as
pivot that the force is applied, and is the angle between and . As seen in Figure 22.34(a), right hand rule 1 gives
the forces on the sides to be equal in magnitude and opposite in direction, so that the net force is again zero.
However, each force produces a clockwise torque. Since

, the torque on each vertical segment is

is the distance from the

is the force,

, where

, and the two add to give a total torque.

22.19

Access for free at openstax.org

22.8 • Torque on a Current Loop: Motors and Meters

975

FIGURE 22.34 Top views of a current-carrying loop in a magnetic field. (a) The equation for torque is derived using this view. Note that the
perpendicular to the loop makes an angle with the field that is the same as the angle between
when is a right angle and
rotates past

and . (b) The maximum torque occurs
. (d) The torque reverses once the loop

. (c) Zero (minimum) torque occurs when is zero and

.

Now, each vertical segment has a length that is perpendicular to , so that the force on each is

. Entering

into the expression for torque yields

If we have a multiple loop of
is

; the expression for the torque becomes

turns, we get

times the torque of one loop. Finally, note that the area of the loop

22.20

This is the torque on a current-carrying loop in a uniform magnetic field. This equation can be shown to be valid for a
loop of any shape. The loop carries a current
makes an angle with the field . The net force on the loop is zero.

, and the perpendicular to the loop

turns, each of area

, has

22.21

EXAMPLE 22.5

Calculating Torque on a Current-Carrying Loop in a Strong Magnetic Field
Find the maximum torque on a 100-turn square loop of a wire of 10.0 cm on a side that carries 15.0 A of current in a
2.00-T field.

976

22 • Magnetism

Strategy

Torque on the loop can be found using

. Maximum torque occurs when

and

.

Solution

For

, the maximum torque is

Entering known values yields

Discussion

This torque is large enough to be useful in a motor.

22.22

22.23

. The torque then reversesits direction once the coil rotates past

The torque found in the preceding example is the maximum. As the coil rotates, the torque decreases to zero at
. (See Figure 22.34(d).) This means
. To get the coil to
with automatic

that, unless we do something, the coil will oscillate back and forth about equilibrium at
continue rotating in the same direction, we can reverse the current as it passes through
switches called brushes. (See Figure 22.35.)

FIGURE 22.35 (a) As the angular momentum of the coil carries it through
clockwise. (b) The coil will rotate continuously in the clockwise direction, with the current reversing each half revolution to maintain the
clockwise torque.

, the brushes reverse the current to keep the torque

Meters, such as those in analog fuel gauges on a car, are another common application of magnetic torque on a
current-carrying loop. Figure 22.36 shows that a meter is very similar in construction to a motor. The meter in the
figure has its magnets shaped to limit the effect of by making
range. Thus the torque is proportional to and not
current-produced torque. This makes the needle deflection proportional to . If an exact proportionality cannot be
achieved, the gauge reading can be calibrated. To produce a galvanometer for use in analog voltmeters and
ammeters that have a low resistance and respond to small currents, we use a large loop area

. A linear spring exerts a counter-torque that balances the

perpendicular to the loop over a large angular

, high magnetic field

, and low-resistance coils.

Access for free at openstax.org

22.9 • Magnetic Fields Produced by Currents: Ampere’s Law

977

FIGURE 22.36 Meters are very similar to motors but only rotate through a part of a revolution. The magnetic poles of this meter are shaped
to keep the component of
return spring is proportional only to the current

perpendicular to the loop constant, so that the torque does not depend on and the deflection against the

.

22.9 Magnetic Fields Produced by Currents: Ampere’s Law

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

• Calculate current that produces a magnetic field.
• Use the right hand rule 2 to determine the direction of current or the direction of magnetic field loops.

How much current is needed to produce a significant magnetic field, perhaps as strong as the Earth’s field?
Surveyors will tell you that overhead electric power lines create magnetic fields that interfere with their compass
readings. Indeed, when Oersted discovered in 1820 that a current in a wire affected a compass needle, he was not
dealing with extremely large currents. How does the shape of wires carrying current affect the shape of the
magnetic field created? We noted earlier that a current loop created a magnetic field similar to that of a bar magnet,
but what about a straight wire or a toroid (doughnut)? How is the direction of a current-created field related to the
direction of the current? Answers to these questions are explored in this section, together with a brief discussion of
the law governing the fields created by currents.

Magnetic Field Created by a Long Straight Current-Carrying Wire: Right Hand Rule 2

Magnetic fields have both direction and magnitude. As noted before, one way to explore the direction of a magnetic
field is with compasses, as shown for a long straight current-carrying wire in Figure 22.37. Hall probes can
determine the magnitude of the field. The field around a long straight wire is found to be in circular loops. The right
hand rule 2 (RHR-2) emerges from this exploration and is valid for any current segment—point the thumb in the
direction of the current, and the fingers curl in the direction of the magnetic field loopscreated by it.

978

22 • Magnetism

FIGURE 22.37 (a) Compasses placed near a long straight current-carrying wire indicate that field lines form circular loops centered on the
wire. (b) Right hand rule 2 states that, if the right hand thumb points in the direction of the current, the fingers curl in the direction of the
field. This rule is consistent with the field mapped for the long straight wire and is valid for any current segment.

The magnetic field strength (magnitude) produced by a long straight current-carrying wire is found by
experiment to be

22.24

is the shortest distance to the wire, and the constant

where is the current,
permeability of free space.
speed of light.) Since the wire is very long, the magnitude of the field depends only on distance from the wire , not
on position along the wire.

is one of the basic constants in nature. We will see later that

is related to the

is the

EXAMPLE 22.6

Calculating Current that Produces a Magnetic Field
Find the current in a long straight wire that would produce a magnetic field twice the strength of the Earth’s at a
distance of 5.0 cm from the wire.

Strategy

The Earth’s field is about

, and so here

due to the wire is taken to be

. The equation

can be used to find , since all other quantities are known.

Solution

Solving for

and entering known values gives

Access for free at openstax.org

22.9 • Magnetic Fields Produced by Currents: Ampere’s Law

979

22.25

Discussion

So a moderately large current produces a significant magnetic field at a distance of 5.0 cm from a long straight wire.
Note that the answer is stated to only two digits, since the Earth’s field is specified to only two digits in this example.

Ampere’s Law and Others

The magnetic field of a long straight wire has more implications than you might at first suspect. Each segment of
current produces a magnetic field like that of a long straight wire, and the total field of any shape current is the
vector sum of the fields due to each segment.The formal statement of the direction and magnitude of the field due
to each segment is called the Biot-Savart law. Integral calculus is needed to sum the field for an arbitrary shape
current. This results in a more complete law, called Ampere’s law, which relates magnetic field and current in a
general way. Ampere’s law in turn is a part of Maxwell’s equations, which give a complete theory of all
electromagnetic phenomena. Considerations of how Maxwell’s equations appear to different observers led to the
modern theory of relativity, and the realization that electric and magnetic fields are different manifestations of the
same thing. Most of this is beyond the scope of this text in both mathematical level, requiring calculus, and in the
amount of space that can be devoted to it. But for the interested student, and particularly for those who continue in
physics, engineering, or similar pursuits, delving into these matters further will reveal descriptions of nature that are
elegant as well as profound. In this text, we shall keep the general features in mind, such as RHR-2 and the rules for
magnetic field lines listed in Magnetic Fields and Magnetic Field Lines, while concentrating on the fields created in
certain important situations.

Making Connections: Relativity

Hearing all we do about Einstein, we sometimes get the impression that he invented relativity out of nothing. On
the contrary, one of Einstein’s motivations was to solve difficulties in knowing how different observers see
magnetic and electric fields.

Magnetic Field Produced by a Current-Carrying Circular Loop

The magnetic field near a current-carrying loop of wire is shown in Figure 22.38. Both the direction and the
magnitude of the magnetic field produced by a current-carrying loop are complex. RHR-2 can be used to give the
direction of the field near the loop, but mapping with compasses and the rules about field lines given in Magnetic
Fields and Magnetic Field Lines are needed for more detail. There is a simple formula for the magnetic field
strength at the center of a circular loop. It is

22.26

is the radius of the loop. This equation is very similar to that for a straight wire, but it is valid onlyat the

where
center of a circular loop of wire. The similarity of the equations does indicate that similar field strength can be
obtained at the center of a loop. One way to get a larger field is to have
Note that the larger the loop, the smaller the field at its center, because the current is farther away.

loops; then, the field is

.

980

22 • Magnetism

FIGURE 22.38 (a) RHR-2 gives the direction of the magnetic field inside and outside a current-carrying loop. (b) More detailed mapping
with compasses or with a Hall probe completes the picture. The field is similar to that of a bar magnet.

Magnetic Field Produced by a Current-Carrying Solenoid

A solenoid is a long coil of wire (with many turns or loops, as opposed to a flat loop). Because of its shape, the field
inside a solenoid can be very uniform, and also very strong. The field just outside the coils is nearly zero. Figure
22.39 shows how the field looks and how its direction is given by RHR-2.

FIGURE 22.39 (a) Because of its shape, the field inside a solenoid of length is remarkably uniform in magnitude and direction, as indicated
by the straight and uniformly spaced field lines. The field outside the coils is nearly zero. (b) This cutaway shows the magnetic field
generated by the current in the solenoid.

The magnetic field inside of a current-carrying solenoid is very uniform in direction and magnitude. Only near the
ends does it begin to weaken and change direction. The field outside has similar complexities to flat loops and bar
magnets, but the magnetic field strength inside a solenoid is simply

22.27

where is the number of loops per unit length of the solenoid
length). Note that
Large uniform fields spread over a large volume are possible with solenoids, as Example 22.7 implies.

is the field strength anywhere in the uniform region of the interior and not just at the center.

being the number of loops and the

, with

Access for free at openstax.org

22.10 • Magnetic Force between Two Parallel Conductors

981

EXAMPLE 22.7

Calculating Field Strength inside a Solenoid
What is the field inside a 2.00-m-long solenoid that has 2000 loops and carries a 1600-A current?

Strategy

To find the field strength inside a solenoid, we use

. First, we note the number of loops per unit length is

Solution

Substituting known values gives

Discussion

22.28

22.29

This is a large field strength that could be established over a large-diameter solenoid, such as in medical uses of
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). The very large current is an indication that the fields of this strength are not
easily achieved, however. Such a large current through 1000 loops squeezed into a meter’s length would produce
significant heating. Higher currents can be achieved by using superconducting wires, although this is expensive.
There is an upper limit to the current, since the superconducting state is disrupted by very large magnetic fields.

There are interesting variations of the flat coil and solenoid. For example, the toroidal coil used to confine the
reactive particles in tokamaks is much like a solenoid bent into a circle. The field inside a toroid is very strong but
circular. Charged particles travel in circles, following the field lines, and collide with one another, perhaps inducing
fusion. But the charged particles do not cross field lines and escape the toroid. A whole range of coil shapes are
used to produce all sorts of magnetic field shapes. Adding ferromagnetic materials produces greater field strengths
and can have a significant effect on the shape of the field. Ferromagnetic materials tend to trap magnetic fields (the
field lines bend into the ferromagnetic material, leaving weaker fields outside it) and are used as shields for devices
that are adversely affected by magnetic fields, including the Earth’s magnetic field.

PHET EXPLORATIONS

Generator
Generate electricity with a bar magnet! Discover the physics behind the phenomena by exploring magnets and how
you can use them to make a bulb light.

Click to view content (https://openstax.org/l/28gen).

22.10 Magnetic Force between Two Parallel Conductors

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

• Describe the effects of the magnetic force between two conductors.
• Calculate the force between two parallel conductors.

You might expect that there are significant forces between current-carrying wires, since ordinary currents produce
significant magnetic fields and these fields exert significant forces on ordinary currents. But you might not expect
that the force between wires is used to definethe ampere. It might also surprise you to learn that this force has
something to do with why large circuit breakers burn up when they attempt to interrupt large currents.

982

22 • Magnetism

The force between two long straight and parallel conductors separated by a distance can be found by applying
what we have developed in preceding sections. Figure 22.40 shows the wires, their currents, the fields they create,
and the subsequent forces they exert on one another. Let us consider the field produced by wire 1 and the force it
exerts on wire 2 (call the force

at a distance is given to be

). The field due to

22.30

FIGURE 22.40 (a) The magnetic field produced by a long straight conductor is perpendicular to a parallel conductor, as indicated by RHR-2.
(b) A view from above of the two wires shown in (a), with one magnetic field line shown for each wire. RHR-1 shows that the force between
the parallel conductors is attractive when the currents are in the same direction. A similar analysis shows that the force is repulsive
between currents in opposite directions.

This field is uniform along wire 2 and perpendicular to it, and so the force

it exerts on wire 2 is given by

with

:

By Newton’s third law, the forces on the wires are equal in magnitude, and so we just write

. (Note that

length. Substituting the expression for

.) Since the wires are very long, it is convenient to think in terms of
into the last equation and rearranging terms gives

22.31

for the magnitude of
, the force per unit

22.32

is the force per unit length between two parallel currents

and

separated by a distance . The force is

attractive if the currents are in the same direction and repulsive if they are in opposite directions.

This force is responsible for the pinch effectin electric arcs and plasmas. The force exists whether the currents are
in wires or not. In an electric arc, where currents are moving parallel to one another, there is an attraction that
squeezes currents into a smaller tube. In large circuit breakers, like those used in neighborhood power distribution
systems, the pinch effect can concentrate an arc between plates of a switch trying to break a large current, burn
holes, and even ignite the equipment. Another example of the pinch effect is found in the solar plasma, where jets of
ionized material, such as solar flares, are shaped by magnetic forces.

The operational definition of the ampereis based on the force between current-carrying wires. Note that for parallel
wires separated by 1 meter with each carrying 1 ampere, the force per meter is

22.33

Since

is exactly

by definition, and because

, the force per meter is exactly

. This is the basis of the operational definition of the ampere.

Access for free at openstax.org

22.11 • More Applications of Magnetism

983

The Ampere

The official definition of the ampere is:

One ampere of current through each of two parallel conductors of infinite length, separated by one meter in
empty space free of other magnetic fields, causes a force of exactly

on each conductor.

Infinite-length straight wires are impractical and so, in practice, a current balance is constructed with coils of wire
separated by a few centimeters. Force is measured to determine current. This also provides us with a method for
measuring the coulomb. We measure the charge that flows for a current of one ampere in one second. That is,

. For both the ampere and the coulomb, the method of measuring force between conductors is the

most accurate in practice.

22.11 More Applications of Magnetism

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

• Describe some applications of magnetism.

Mass Spectrometry

The curved paths followed by charged particles in magnetic fields can be put to use. A charged particle moving
perpendicular to a magnetic field travels in a circular path having a radius .

22.34

It was noted that this relationship could be used to measure the mass of charged particles such as ions. A mass
spectrometer is a device that measures such masses. Most mass spectrometers use magnetic fields for this
purpose, although some of them have extremely sophisticated designs. Since there are five variables in the
relationship, there are many possibilities. However, if
proportional to the mass
simple design. (See Figure 22.41.) The process begins with an ion source, a device like an electron gun. The ion
source gives ions their charge, accelerates them to some velocity , and directs a beam of them into the next stage
of the spectrometer. This next region is a velocity selectorthat only allows particles with a particular value of
get through.

can be fixed, then the radius of the path is simply
of the charged particle. Let us examine one such mass spectrometer that has a relatively

, and

to

,

984

22 • Magnetism

FIGURE 22.41 This mass spectrometer uses a velocity selector to fix

so that the radius of the path is proportional to mass.

The velocity selector has both an electric field and a magnetic field, perpendicular to one another, producing forces
in opposite directions on the ions. Only those ions for which the forces balance travel in a straight line into the next
region. If the forces balance, then the electric force
Noting that

equals the magnetic force

cancels, we see that

, so that

.

22.35

can be selected by
and . In the final region, there is only a uniform magnetic field, and so the charged particles move in

is the velocity particles must have to make it through the velocity selector, and further, that
varying
circular arcs with radii proportional to particle mass. The paths also depend on charge , but since is in multiples
of electron charges, it is easy to determine and to discriminate between ions in different charge states.

Mass spectrometry today is used extensively in chemistry and biology laboratories to identify chemical and
biological substances according to their mass-to-charge ratios. In medicine, mass spectrometers are used to
measure the concentration of isotopes used as tracers. Usually, biological molecules such as proteins are very large,
so they are broken down into smaller fragments before analyzing. Recently, large virus particles have been analyzed
as a whole on mass spectrometers. Sometimes a gas chromatograph or high-performance liquid chromatograph
provides an initial separation of the large molecules, which are then input into the mass spectrometer.

Cathode Ray Tubes—CRTs—and the Like

What do non-flat-screen TVs, old computer monitors, x-ray machines, and the 2-mile-long Stanford Linear
Accelerator have in common? All of them accelerate electrons, making them different versions of the electron gun.
Many of these devices use magnetic fields to steer the accelerated electrons. Figure 22.42 shows the construction
of the type of cathode ray tube (CRT) found in some TVs, oscilloscopes, and old computer monitors. Two pairs of
coils are used to steer the electrons, one vertically and the other horizontally, to their desired destination.

Access for free at openstax.org

22.11 • More Applications of Magnetism

985

FIGURE 22.42 The cathode ray tube (CRT) is so named because rays of electrons originate at the cathode in the electron gun. Magnetic
coils are used to steer the beam in many CRTs. In this case, the beam is moved down. Another pair of horizontal coils would steer the beam
horizontally.

Magnetic Resonance Imaging

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is one of the most useful and rapidly growing medical imaging tools. It non-
invasively produces two-dimensional and three-dimensional images of the body that provide important medical
information with none of the hazards of x-rays. MRI is based on an effect called nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
in which an externally applied magnetic field interacts with the nuclei of certain atoms, particularly those of
hydrogen (protons). These nuclei possess their own small magnetic fields, similar to those of electrons and the
current loops discussed earlier in this chapter.

When placed in an external magnetic field, such nuclei experience a torque that pushes or aligns the nuclei into one
of two new energy states—depending on the orientation of its spin (analogous to the N pole and S pole in a bar
magnet). Transitions from the lower to higher energy state can be achieved by using an external radio frequency
signal to “flip” the orientation of the small magnets. (This is actually a quantum mechanical process. The direction
of the nuclear magnetic field is quantized as is energy in the radio waves. We will return to these topics in later
chapters.) The specific frequency of the radio waves that are absorbed and reemitted depends sensitively on the
type of nucleus, the chemical environment, and the external magnetic field strength. Therefore, this is a resonance
phenomenon in which nucleiin a magneticfield act like resonators (analogous to those discussed in the treatment
of sound in Oscillatory Motion and Waves) that absorb and reemit only certain frequencies. Hence, the phenomenon
is named nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR).

NMR has been used for more than 50 years as an analytical tool. It was formulated in 1946 by F. Bloch and E.
Purcell, with the 1952 Nobel Prize in Physics going to them for their work. Over the past two decades, NMR has been
developed to produce detailed images in a process now called magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), a name coined to
avoid the use of the word “nuclear” and the concomitant implication that nuclear radiation is involved. (It is not.)
The 2003 Nobel Prize in Medicine went to P. Lauterbur and P. Mansfield for their work with MRI applications.

The largest part of the MRI unit is a superconducting magnet that creates a magnetic field, typically between 1 and
2 T in strength, over a relatively large volume. MRI images can be both highly detailed and informative about
structures and organ functions. It is helpful that normal and non-normal tissues respond differently for slight
changes in the magnetic field. In most medical images, the protons that are hydrogen nuclei are imaged. (About 2/3
of the atoms in the body are hydrogen.) Their location and density give a variety of medically useful information,
such as organ function, the condition of tissue (as in the brain), and the shape of structures, such as vertebral disks
and knee-joint surfaces. MRI can also be used to follow the movement of certain ions across membranes, yielding
information on active transport, osmosis, dialysis, and other phenomena. With excellent spatial resolution, MRI can
provide information about tumors, strokes, shoulder injuries, infections, etc.

An image requires position information as well as the density of a nuclear type (usually protons). By varying the
magnetic field slightly over the volume to be imaged, the resonant frequency of the protons is made to vary with
position. Broadcast radio frequencies are swept over an appropriate range and nuclei absorb and reemit them only if
the nuclei are in a magnetic field with the correct strength. The imaging receiver gathers information through the
body almost point by point, building up a tissue map. The reception of reemitted radio waves as a function of
frequency thus gives position information. These “slices” or cross sections through the body are only several mm
thick. The intensity of the reemitted radio waves is proportional to the concentration of the nuclear type being
flipped, as well as information on the chemical environment in that area of the body. Various techniques are

986

22 • Magnetism

available for enhancing contrast in images and for obtaining more information. Scans called T1, T2, or proton
density scans rely on different relaxation mechanisms of nuclei. Relaxation refers to the time it takes for the protons
to return to equilibrium after the external field is turned off. This time depends upon tissue type and status (such as
inflammation).

While MRI images are superior to x rays for certain types of tissue and have none of the hazards of x rays, they do
not completely supplant x-ray images. MRI is less effective than x rays for detecting breaks in bone, for example,
and in imaging breast tissue, so the two diagnostic tools complement each other. MRI images are also expensive
compared to simple x-ray images and tend to be used most often where they supply information not readily
obtained from x rays. Another disadvantage of MRI is that the patient is totally enclosed with detectors close to the
body for about 30 minutes or more, leading to claustrophobia. It is also difficult for the obese patient to be in the
magnet tunnel. New “open-MRI” machines are now available in which the magnet does not completely surround the
patient.

Over the last decade, the development of much faster scans, called “functional MRI” (fMRI), has allowed us to map
the functioning of various regions in the brain responsible for thought and motor control. This technique measures
the change in blood flow for activities (thought, experiences, action) in the brain. The nerve cells increase their
consumption of oxygen when active. Blood hemoglobin releases oxygen to active nerve cells and has somewhat
different magnetic properties when oxygenated than when deoxygenated. With MRI, we can measure this and
detect a blood oxygen-dependent signal. Most of the brain scans today use fMRI.

Other Medical Uses of Magnetic Fields

Currents in nerve cells and the heart create magnetic fields like any other currents. These can be measured but with
some difficulty since their strengths are about
to
heart’s magnetic field as it beats is called a magnetocardiogram (MCG), while measurements of the brain’s
magnetic field is called a magnetoencephalogram (MEG). Both give information that differs from that obtained by
measuring the electric fields of these organs (ECGs and EEGs), but they are not yet of sufficient importance to make
these difficult measurements common.

lessthan the Earth’s magnetic field. Recording of the

In both of these techniques, the sensors do not touch the body. MCG can be used in fetal studies, and is probably
more sensitive than echocardiography. MCG also looks at the heart’s electrical activity whose voltage output is too
small to be recorded by surface electrodes as in EKG. It has the potential of being a rapid scan for early diagnosis of
cardiac ischemia (obstruction of blood flow to the heart) or problems with the fetus.

MEG can be used to identify abnormal electrical discharges in the brain that produce weak magnetic signals.
Therefore, it looks at brain activity, not just brain structure. It has been used for studies of Alzheimer’s disease and
epilepsy. Advances in instrumentation to measure very small magnetic fields have allowed these two techniques to
be used more in recent years. What is used is a sensor called a SQUID, for superconducting quantum interference
device. This operates at liquid helium temperatures and can measure magnetic fields thousands of times smaller
than the Earth’s.

Finally, there is a burgeoning market for magnetic cures in which magnets are applied in a variety of ways to the
body, from magnetic bracelets to magnetic mattresses. The best that can be said for such practices is that they are
apparently harmless, unless the magnets get close to the patient’s computer or magnetic storage disks. Claims are
made for a broad spectrum of benefits from cleansing the blood to giving the patient more energy, but clinical
studies have not verified these claims, nor is there an identifiable mechanism by which such benefits might occur.

PHET EXPLORATIONS

Magnet and Compass
Ever wonder how a compass worked to point you to the Arctic? Explore the interactions between a compass and bar
magnet, and then add the Earth and find the surprising answer! Vary the magnet's strength, and see how things
change both inside and outside. Use the field meter to measure how the magnetic field changes.

Click to view content (https://openstax.org/l/28magcomp).

Access for free at openstax.org

22.11 • More Applications of Magnetism

987

988

22 • Glossary

Glossary

Ampere’s law the physical law that states that the

magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) a medical

magnetic field around an electric current is
proportional to the current; each segment of current
produces a magnetic field like that of a long straight
wire, and the total field of any shape current is the
vector sum of the fields due to each segment

B-field another term for magnetic field
Biot-Savart law a physical law that describes the
magnetic field generated by an electric current in
terms of a specific equation

Curie temperature the temperature above which a
ferromagnetic material cannot be magnetized
direction of magnetic field lines the direction that

the north end of a compass needle points

domains regions within a material that behave like

small bar magnets

imaging technique that uses magnetic fields create
detailed images of internal tissues and organs

magnetized to be turned into a magnet; to be

induced to be magnetic

magnetocardiogram (MCG) a recording of the heart’s

magnetic field as it beats

magnetoencephalogram (MEG) a measurement of

the brain’s magnetic field

Maxwell’s equations a set of four equations that

describe electromagnetic phenomena

meter common application of magnetic torque on a

current-carrying loop that is very similar in
construction to a motor; by design, the torque is
proportional to and not
is proportional to the current

, so the needle deflection

electromagnet an object that is temporarily magnetic

motor

loop of wire in a magnetic field; when current

when an electrical current is passed through it
electromagnetism the use of electrical currents to

induce magnetism

ferromagnetic materials, such as iron, cobalt, nickel,
and gadolinium, that exhibit strong magnetic effects

gauss G, the unit of the magnetic field strength;

is passed through the loops, the magnetic field
exerts torque on the loops, which rotates a shaft;
electrical energy is converted to mechanical work in
the process

north magnetic pole the end or the side of a magnet
that is attracted toward Earth’s geographic north
pole

Hall effect

the creation of voltage across a current-

nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) a phenomenon

carrying conductor by a magnetic field

Hall emf

the electromotive force created by a

current-carrying conductor by a magnetic field,

Lorentz force the force on a charge moving in a

magnetic field

magnetic field the representation of magnetic forces
magnetic field lines the pictorial representation of
the strength and the direction of a magnetic field
magnetic field strength (magnitude) produced by a
long straight current-carrying wire defined as

, where is the current,

is the shortest

distance to the wire, and
free space

is the permeability of

magnetic field strength at the center of a circular

loop defined as

where

is the radius of

the loop

magnetic field strength inside a solenoid defined as

where is the number of loops per unit
being the

, with

length of the solenoid
number of loops and the length)

magnetic force the force on a charge produced by its
motion through a magnetic field; the Lorentz force
magnetic monopoles an isolated magnetic pole; a
south pole without a north pole, or vice versa (no
magnetic monopole has ever been observed)

Access for free at openstax.org

in which an externally applied magnetic field
interacts with the nuclei of certain atoms

permeability of free space the measure of the ability
of a material, in this case free space, to support a
magnetic field; the constant

right hand rule 1 (RHR-1)

the rule to determine the

direction of the magnetic force on a positive moving
charge: when the thumb of the right hand points in
the direction of the charge’s velocity and the
fingers point in the direction of the magnetic field ,
then the force on the charge is perpendicular and
away from the palm; the force on a negative charge
is perpendicular and into the palm

right hand rule 2 (RHR-2) a rule to determine the

direction of the magnetic field induced by a current-
carrying wire: Point the thumb of the right hand in
the direction of current, and the fingers curl in the
direction of the magnetic field loops

solenoid a thin wire wound into a coil that produces a
magnetic field when an electric current is passed
through it

south magnetic pole the end or the side of a magnet
that is attracted toward Earth’s geographic south
pole

tesla T, the SI unit of the magnetic field strength;

22 • Section Summary

989

the magnitude of which is

where is the angle between the directions of
and .

• The SI unit for magnetic field strength

is the

tesla (T), which is related to other units by

• The directionof the force on a moving charge is
given by right hand rule 1 (RHR-1): Point the
thumb of the right hand in the direction of
fingers in the direction of
the palm points in the direction of

.

, the

, and a perpendicular to

and . Since the force is zero if

• The force is perpendicular to the plane formed by
is parallel to ,
charged particles often follow magnetic field lines
rather than cross them.

22.5 Force on a Moving Charge in a
Magnetic Field: Examples and Applications

• Magnetic force can supply centripetal force and

cause a charged particle to move in a circular path
of radius

where is the component of the velocity
perpendicular to
mass

and charge .

for a charged particle with

22.6 The Hall Effect

• The Hall effect is the creation of voltage , known

as the Hall emf, across a current-carrying
conductor by a magnetic field.

• The Hall emf is given by

for a conductor of width through which charges
move at a speed .

22.7 Magnetic Force on a Current-Carrying
Conductor

• The magnetic force on current-carrying conductors

is given by

where is the current,
is the length of a straight
conductor in a uniform magnetic field , and is
the angle between and . The force follows
RHR-1 with the thumb in the direction of

.

Section Summary

22.1 Magnets

• Magnetism is a subject that includes the

properties of magnets, the effect of the magnetic
force on moving charges and currents, and the
creation of magnetic fields by currents.

• There are two types of magnetic poles, called the
north magnetic pole and south magnetic pole.
• North magnetic poles are those that are attracted

toward the Earth’s geographic north pole.
• Like poles repel and unlike poles attract.
• Magnetic poles always occur in pairs of north and
south—it is not possible to isolate north and south
poles.

22.2 Ferromagnets and Electromagnets

• Magnetic poles always occur in pairs of north and
south—it is not possible to isolate north and south
poles.

• All magnetism is created by electric current.
• Ferromagnetic materials, such as iron, are those

that exhibit strong magnetic effects.

• The atoms in ferromagnetic materials act like

small magnets (due to currents within the atoms)
and can be aligned, usually in millimeter-sized
regions called domains.

• Domains can grow and align on a larger scale,

producing permanent magnets. Such a material is
magnetized, or induced to be magnetic.

• Above a material’s Curie temperature, thermal
agitation destroys the alignment of atoms, and
ferromagnetism disappears.

• Electromagnets employ electric currents to make
magnetic fields, often aided by induced fields in
ferromagnetic materials.

22.3 Magnetic Fields and Magnetic Field
Lines

• Magnetic fields can be pictorially represented by

magnetic field lines, the properties of which are as
follows:

1. The field is tangent to the magnetic field line.
2. Field strength is proportional to the line density.
3. Field lines cannot cross.
4. Field lines are continuous loops.

22.4 Magnetic Field Strength: Force on a
Moving Charge in a Magnetic Field

• Magnetic fields exert a force on a moving charge q,

990

22 • Conceptual Questions

22.8 Torque on a Current Loop: Motors and
Meters

• The magnetic field strength at the center of a

circular loop is given by

• The torque on a current-carrying loop of any

shape in a uniform magnetic field. is

where

is the number of turns,

is the area of the loop,

is the current,
is the magnetic field

is the radius of the loop. This equation

where
becomes
RHR-2 gives the direction of the field about the
loop. A long coil is called a solenoid.

for a flat coil of

loops.

strength, and is the angle between the
perpendicular to the loop and the magnetic field.

22.9 Magnetic Fields Produced by Currents:
Ampere’s Law

• The strength of the magnetic field created by
current in a long straight wire is given by

where is the current,
the wire, and the constant

is the shortest distance to

is the permeability of

free space.

• The direction of the magnetic field created by a
long straight wire is given by right hand rule 2
(RHR-2): Point the thumb of the right hand in the
direction of current, and the fingers curl in the
direction of the magnetic field loopscreated by it.

• The magnetic field created by current following

any path is the sum (or integral) of the fields due to
segments along the path (magnitude and direction
as for a straight wire), resulting in a general
relationship between current and field known as
Ampere’s law.

Conceptual Questions

22.1 Magnets

1. Volcanic and other such activity at the mid-Atlantic
ridge extrudes material to fill the gap between
separating tectonic plates associated with
continental drift. The magnetization of rocks is
found to reverse in a coordinated manner with
distance from the ridge. What does this imply about
the Earth’s magnetic field and how could the
knowledge of the spreading rate be used to give its
historical record?

22.3 Magnetic Fields and Magnetic Field
Lines

2. Explain why the magnetic field would not be unique
(that is, not have a single value) at a point in space
where magnetic field lines might cross. (Consider
the direction of the field at such a point.)

Access for free at openstax.org

• The magnetic field strength inside a solenoid is

where is the number of loops per unit length of
the solenoid. The field inside is very uniform in
magnitude and direction.

22.10 Magnetic Force between Two Parallel
Conductors

• The force between two parallel currents

and
, separated by a distance , has a magnitude per
unit length given by

• The force is attractive if the currents are in the

same direction, repulsive if they are in opposite
directions.

22.11 More Applications of Magnetism

• Crossed (perpendicular) electric and magnetic
fields act as a velocity filter, giving equal and
opposite forces on any charge with velocity
perpendicular to the fields and of magnitude

3. List the ways in which magnetic field lines and

electric field lines are similar. For example, the field
direction is tangent to the line at any point in space.
Also list the ways in which they differ. For example,
electric force is parallel to electric field lines,
whereas magnetic force on moving charges is
perpendicular to magnetic field lines.

4. Noting that the magnetic field lines of a bar magnet
resemble the electric field lines of a pair of equal
and opposite charges, do you expect the magnetic
field to rapidly decrease in strength with distance
from the magnet? Is this consistent with your
experience with magnets?

5. Is the Earth’s magnetic field parallel to the ground
at all locations? If not, where is it parallel to the
surface? Is its strength the same at all locations? If
not, where is it greatest?

22 • Conceptual Questions

991

22.4 Magnetic Field Strength: Force on a
Moving Charge in a Magnetic Field

6. If a charged particle moves in a straight line through

some region of space, can you say that the
magnetic field in that region is necessarily zero?

13. While operating, a high-precision TV monitor is

placed on its side during maintenance. The image
on the monitor changes color and blurs slightly.
Discuss the possible relation of these effects to
the Earth’s magnetic field.

22.5 Force on a Moving Charge in a
Magnetic Field: Examples and Applications

7. How can the motion of a charged particle be used
to distinguish between a magnetic and an electric
field?

8. High-velocity charged particles can damage

biological cells and are a component of radiation
exposure in a variety of locations ranging from
research facilities to natural background. Describe
how you could use a magnetic field to shield
yourself.

9. If a cosmic ray proton approaches the Earth from
outer space along a line toward the center of the
Earth that lies in the plane of the equator, in what
direction will it be deflected by the Earth’s magnetic
field? What about an electron? A neutron?

10. What are the signs of the charges on the particles

in Figure 22.43?

FIGURE 22.43

11. Which of the particles in Figure 22.44 has the

greatest velocity, assuming they have identical
charges and masses?

FIGURE 22.44

12. Which of the particles in Figure 22.44 has the

greatest mass, assuming all have identical charges
and velocities?

22.6 The Hall Effect

14. Discuss how the Hall effect could be used to
obtain information on free charge density in a
conductor. (Hint: Consider how drift velocity and
current are related.)

22.7 Magnetic Force on a Current-Carrying
Conductor

15. Draw a sketch of the situation in Figure 22.29
showing the direction of electrons carrying the
current, and use RHR-1 to verify the direction of
the force on the wire.

16. Verify that the direction of the force in an MHD
drive, such as that in Figure 22.31, does not
depend on the sign of the charges carrying the
current across the fluid.

17. Why would a magnetohydrodynamic drive work
better in ocean water than in fresh water? Also,
why would superconducting magnets be
desirable?

18. Which is more likely to interfere with compass
readings, AC current in your refrigerator or DC
current when you start your car? Explain.

22.8 Torque on a Current Loop: Motors and
Meters

19. Draw a diagram and use RHR-1 to show that the

forces on the top and bottom segments of the
motor’s current loop in Figure 22.33 are vertical
and produce no torque about the axis of rotation.

22.9 Magnetic Fields Produced by Currents:
Ampere’s Law

20. Make a drawing and use RHR-2 to find the

direction of the magnetic field of a current loop in
a motor (such as in Figure 22.33). Then show that
the direction of the torque on the loop is the same
as produced by like poles repelling and unlike
poles attracting.

992

22 • Conceptual Questions

22.10 Magnetic Force between Two Parallel
Conductors

21. Is the force attractive or repulsive between the

hot and neutral lines hung from power poles?
Why?

22. If you have three parallel wires in the same plane,
as in Figure 22.45, with currents in the outer two
running in opposite directions, is it possible for the
middle wire to be repelled by both? Attracted by
both? Explain.

24. Use the right hand rules to show that the force
between the two loops in Figure 22.46 is
attractive if the currents are in the same direction
and repulsive if they are in opposite directions. Is
this consistent with like poles of the loops
repelling and unlike poles of the loops attracting?
Draw sketches to justify your answers.

FIGURE 22.45 Three parallel coplanar wires with currents in
the outer two in opposite directions.

FIGURE 22.46 Two loops of wire carrying currents can exert
forces and torques on one another.

23. Suppose two long straight wires run perpendicular
to one another without touching. Does one exert a
net force on the other? If so, what is its direction?
Does one exert a net torque on the other? If so,
what is its direction? Justify your responses by
using the right hand rules.

25. If one of the loops in Figure 22.46 is tilted slightly

relative to the other and their currents are in the
same direction, what are the directions of the
torques they exert on each other? Does this imply
that the poles of the bar magnet-like fields they
create will line up with each other if the loops are
allowed to rotate?

26. Electric field lines can be shielded by the Faraday
cage effect. Can we have magnetic shielding? Can
we have gravitational shielding?

22.11 More Applications of Magnetism

27. Measurements of the weak and fluctuating

magnetic fields associated with brain activity are
called magnetoencephalograms (MEGs). Do the
brain’s magnetic fields imply coordinated or
uncoordinated nerve impulses? Explain.

28. Discuss the possibility that a Hall voltage would be
generated on the moving heart of a patient during
MRI imaging. Also discuss the same effect on the
wires of a pacemaker. (The fact that patients with
pacemakers are not given MRIs is significant.)
29. A patient in an MRI unit turns his head quickly to

one side and experiences momentary dizziness
and a strange taste in his mouth. Discuss the
possible causes.

Access for free at openstax.org

30. You are told that in a certain region there is either

a uniform electric or magnetic field. What
measurement or observation could you make to
determine the type? (Ignore the Earth’s magnetic
field.)

31. An example of magnetohydrodynamics (MHD)

comes from the flow of a river (salty water). This
fluid interacts with the Earth’s magnetic field to
produce a potential difference between the two
river banks. How would you go about calculating
the potential difference?

Problems & Exercises

22.4 Magnetic Field Strength: Force on a
Moving Charge in a Magnetic Field

1. What is the direction of the magnetic force on a

positive charge that moves as shown in each of the
six cases shown in Figure 22.47?

22 • Problems & Exercises

993

32. Draw gravitational field lines between 2 masses,
electric field lines between a positive and a
negative charge, electric field lines between 2
positive charges and magnetic field lines around a
magnet. Qualitatively describe the differences
between the fields and the entities responsible for
the field lines.

5. What is the direction of the magnetic field that

produces the magnetic force on a positive charge as
shown in each of the three cases in the figure
below, assuming

is perpendicular to ?

FIGURE 22.49

6. Repeat the previous exercise for a negative charge.
7. What is the maximum magnitude of the force on an

charge that you
aluminum rod with a
pass between the poles of a 1.50-T permanent
magnet at a speed of 5.00 m/s? In what direction is
the force?

FIGURE 22.47

8. (a) Aircraft sometimes acquire small static charges.

2. Repeat the previous exercise for a negative charge.
3. What is the direction of the velocity of a negative

charge that experiences the magnetic force shown
in each of the three cases in Figure 22.48, assuming
it moves perpendicular to

FIGURE 22.48

4. Repeat the previous exercise for a positive charge.

Suppose a supersonic jet has a
charge
and flies due west at a speed of 660 m/s over the
Earth’s magnetic south pole (near Earth's
geographic north pole), where the
magnetic field points straight down. What are the
direction and the magnitude of the magnetic force
on the plane? (b) Discuss whether the value
obtained in part (a) implies this is a significant or
negligible effect.

9. (a) A cosmic ray proton moving toward the Earth at

experiences a magnetic force of
. What is the strength of the

magnetic field if there is a
the proton’s velocity? (b) Is the value obtained in
part (a) consistent with the known strength of the
Earth’s magnetic field on its surface? Discuss.

angle between it and

994

22 • Problems & Exercises

10. An electron moving at

in a 1.25-T

magnetic field experiences a magnetic force of

. What angle does the velocity of
the electron make with the magnetic field? There
are two answers.

11. (a) A physicist performing a sensitive

16. What radius circular path does an electron travel if
it moves at the same speed and in the same
magnetic field as the proton in Exercise 22.13?

17. A velocity selector in a mass spectrometer uses a
0.100-T magnetic field. (a) What electric field
strength is needed to select a speed of

measurement wants to limit the magnetic force on
a moving charge in her equipment to less than

? (b) What is the voltage between

the plates if they are separated by 1.00 cm?

. What is the greatest the charge

18. An electron in a TV CRT moves with a speed of

, in a direction perpendicular to the

Earth’s field, which has a strength of

. (a) What strength electric field

must be applied perpendicular to the Earth’s field
to make the electron moves in a straight line? (b)
If this is done between plates separated by 1.00
cm, what is the voltage applied? (Note that TVs
are usually surrounded by a ferromagnetic
material to shield against external magnetic fields
and avoid the need for such a correction.)

19. (a) At what speed will a proton move in a circular

path of the same radius as the electron in Exercise
22.12? (b) What would the radius of the path be if
the proton had the same speed as the electron?
(c) What would the radius be if the proton had the
same kinetic energy as the electron? (d) The same
momentum?

20. A mass spectrometer is being used to separate
common oxygen-16 from the much rarer
oxygen-18, taken from a sample of old glacial ice.
(The relative abundance of these oxygen isotopes
is related to climatic temperature at the time the
ice was deposited.) The ratio of the masses of
these two ions is 16 to 18, the mass of oxygen-16
is
and travel at
field. What is the separation between their paths
when they hit a target after traversing a
semicircle?

and they are singly charged

in a 1.20-T magnetic

21. (a) Triply charged uranium-235 and uranium-238
ions are being separated in a mass spectrometer.
(The much rarer uranium-235 is used as reactor
fuel.) The masses of the ions are
and
at
in a 0.250-T field. What is the
separation between their paths when they hit a
target after traversing a semicircle? (b) Discuss
whether this distance between their paths seems
to be big enough to be practical in the separation
of uranium-235 from uranium-238.

, respectively, and they travel

can be if it moves at a maximum speed of 30.0
m/s in the Earth’s field? (b) Discuss whether it
would be difficult to limit the charge to less than
the value found in (a) by comparing it with typical
static electricity and noting that static is often
absent.

22.5 Force on a Moving Charge in a
Magnetic Field: Examples and Applications

If you need additional support for these problems, see
More Applications of Magnetism.

12. A cosmic ray electron moves at

perpendicular to the Earth’s magnetic field at an
altitude where field strength is
.
What is the radius of the circular path the electron
follows?

13. A proton moves at

perpendicular
to a magnetic field. The field causes the proton to
travel in a circular path of radius 0.800 m. What is
the field strength?

14. (a) Viewers of Star Trekhear of an antimatter drive
on the Starship Enterprise. One possibility for such
a futuristic energy source is to store antimatter
charged particles in a vacuum chamber, circulating
in a magnetic field, and then extract them as
needed. Antimatter annihilates with normal
matter, producing pure energy. What strength
magnetic field is needed to hold antiprotons,
moving at
in a circular path 2.00
m in radius? Antiprotons have the same mass as
protons but the opposite (negative) charge. (b) Is
this field strength obtainable with today’s
technology or is it a futuristic possibility?

15. (a) An oxygen-16 ion with a mass of

travels at

perpendicular to a 1.20-T magnetic field, which
makes it move in a circular arc with a 0.231-m
radius. What positive charge is on the ion? (b)
What is the ratio of this charge to the charge of an
electron? (c) Discuss why the ratio found in (b)
should be an integer.

Access for free at openstax.org

22.6 The Hall Effect

22. A large water main is 2.50 m in diameter and the
average water velocity is 6.00 m/s. Find the Hall
voltage produced if the pipe runs perpendicular to
the Earth’s

field.

23. What Hall voltage is produced by a 0.200-T field
applied across a 2.60-cm-diameter aorta when
blood velocity is 60.0 cm/s?

24. (a) What is the speed of a supersonic aircraft with
a 17.0-m wingspan, if it experiences a 1.60-V Hall
voltage between its wing tips when in level flight
over the north magnetic pole, where the Earth’s
field strength is
(b) Explain why
very little current flows as a result of this Hall
voltage.

25. A nonmechanical water meter could utilize the
Hall effect by applying a magnetic field across a
metal pipe and measuring the Hall voltage
produced. What is the average fluid velocity in a
3.00-cm-diameter pipe, if a 0.500-T field across it
creates a 60.0-mV Hall voltage?

26. Calculate the Hall voltage induced on a patient’s
heart while being scanned by an MRI unit.
Approximate the conducting path on the heart
wall by a wire 7.50 cm long that moves at 10.0
cm/s perpendicular to a 1.50-T magnetic field.
when

27. A Hall probe calibrated to read

placed in a 2.00-T field is placed in a 0.150-T field.
What is its output voltage?

28. Using information in Example 20.6, what would
the Hall voltage be if a 2.00-T field is applied
across a 10-gauge copper wire (2.588 mm in
diameter) carrying a 20.0-A current?

29. Show that the Hall voltage across wires made of

the same material, carrying identical currents, and
subjected to the same magnetic field is inversely
proportional to their diameters. (Hint: Consider
how drift velocity depends on wire diameter.)

30. A patient with a pacemaker is mistakenly being
scanned for an MRI image. A 10.0-cm-long
section of pacemaker wire moves at a speed of
10.0 cm/s perpendicular to the MRI unit’s
magnetic field and a 20.0-mV Hall voltage is
induced. What is the magnetic field strength?

22 • Problems & Exercises

995

22.7 Magnetic Force on a Current-Carrying
Conductor

31. What is the direction of the magnetic force on the

current in each of the six cases in Figure 22.50?

FIGURE 22.50

32. What is the direction of a current that experiences
the magnetic force shown in each of the three
cases in Figure 22.51, assuming the current runs
perpendicular to ?

FIGURE 22.51

33. What is the direction of the magnetic field that
produces the magnetic force shown on the
currents in each of the three cases in Figure
22.52, assuming

is perpendicular to ?

FIGURE 22.52

996

22 • Problems & Exercises

34. (a) What is the force per meter on a lightning bolt

40. The force on the rectangular loop of wire in the

at the equator that carries 20,000 A perpendicular
to the Earth’s
field? (b) What is the
direction of the force if the current is straight up
and the Earth’s field direction is due north, parallel
to the ground?

35. (a) A DC power line for a light-rail system carries

1000 A at an angle of

to the Earth’s

field. What is the force on a

100-m section of this line? (b) Discuss practical
concerns this presents, if any.

36. What force is exerted on the water in an MHD drive

utilizing a 25.0-cm-diameter tube, if 100-A
current is passed across the tube that is
perpendicular to a 2.00-T magnetic field? (The
relatively small size of this force indicates the
need for very large currents and magnetic fields to
make practical MHD drives.)

37. A wire carrying a 30.0-A current passes between

the poles of a strong magnet that is perpendicular
to its field and experiences a 2.16-N force on the
4.00 cm of wire in the field. What is the average
field strength?

38. (a) A 0.750-m-long section of cable carrying

with the Earth’s

current to a car starter motor makes an angle of
field. What is
the current when the wire experiences a force of
? (b) If you run the wire between

the poles of a strong horseshoe magnet,
subjecting 5.00 cm of it to a 1.75-T field, what
force is exerted on this segment of wire?

39. (a) What is the angle between a wire carrying an
8.00-A current and the 1.20-T field it is in if 50.0
cm of the wire experiences a magnetic force of
2.40 N? (b) What is the force on the wire if it is
with the field?
rotated to make an angle of

Access for free at openstax.org

magnetic field in Figure 22.53 can be used to
measure field strength. The field is uniform, and
the plane of the loop is perpendicular to the field.
(a) What is the direction of the magnetic force on
the loop? Justify the claim that the forces on the
sides of the loop are equal and opposite,
independent of how much of the loop is in the field
and do not affect the net force on the loop. (b) If a
current of 5.00 A is used, what is the force per
tesla on the 20.0-cm-wide loop?

FIGURE 22.53 A rectangular loop of wire carrying a current
is perpendicular to a magnetic field. The field is uniform in
the region shown and is zero outside that region.

22.8 Torque on a Current Loop: Motors and
Meters

41. (a) By how many percent is the torque of a motor
decreased if its permanent magnets lose 5.0% of
their strength? (b) How many percent would the
current need to be increased to return the torque
to original values?

42. (a) What is the maximum torque on a 150-turn

square loop of wire 18.0 cm on a side that carries
a 50.0-A current in a 1.60-T field? (b) What is the
torque when is

43. Find the current through a loop needed to create a

maximum torque of
square turns that are 15.0 cm on a side and is in a
uniform 0.800-T magnetic field.

The loop has 50

44. Calculate the magnetic field strength needed on a
200-turn square loop 20.0 cm on a side to create
a maximum torque of
carrying 25.0 A.

if the loop is

22 • Problems & Exercises

997

54. An AC appliance cord has its hot and neutral wires
separated by 3.00 mm and carries a 5.00-A
current. (a) What is the average force per meter
between the wires in the cord? (b) What is the
maximum force per meter between the wires? (c)
Are the forces attractive or repulsive? (d) Do
appliance cords need any special design features
to compensate for these forces?

55. Figure 22.54 shows a long straight wire near a

rectangular current loop. What is the direction and
magnitude of the total force on the loop?

FIGURE 22.54

56. Find the direction and magnitude of the force that
each wire experiences in Figure 22.55(a) by, using
vector addition.

FIGURE 22.55

57. Find the direction and magnitude of the force that

each wire experiences in Figure 22.55(b), using
vector addition.

45. Since the equation for torque on a current-

carrying loop is

, the units of

must equal units of

. Verify this.

46. (a) At what angle is the torque on a current loop
90.0% of maximum? (b) 50.0% of maximum? (c)
10.0% of maximum?

47. A proton has a magnetic field due to its spin on its
axis. The field is similar to that created by a
in radius
circular current loop
(no kidding). Find
with a current of
the maximum torque on a proton in a 2.50-T field.
(This is a significant torque on a small particle.)
48. (a) A 200-turn circular loop of radius 50.0 cm is
vertical, with its axis on an east-west line. A
current of 100 A circulates clockwise in the loop
when viewed from the east. The Earth’s field here
is due north, parallel to the ground, with a strength
of
magnitude of the torque on the loop? (b) Does this
device have any practical applications as a motor?
49. Repeat Exercise 22.41, but with the loop lying flat

. What are the direction and

on the ground with its current circulating
counterclockwise (when viewed from above) in a
location where the Earth’s field is north, but at an
angle
strength of

below the horizontal and with a
.

22.10 Magnetic Force between Two Parallel
Conductors

50. (a) The hot and neutral wires supplying DC power
to a light-rail commuter train carry 800 A and are
separated by 75.0 cm. What is the magnitude and
direction of the force between 50.0 m of these
wires? (b) Discuss the practical consequences of
this force, if any.

51. The force per meter between the two wires of a
jumper cable being used to start a stalled car is
0.225 N/m. (a) What is the current in the wires,
given they are separated by 2.00 cm? (b) Is the
force attractive or repulsive?

52. A 2.50-m segment of wire supplying current to the

motor of a submerged submarine carries 1000 A
and feels a 4.00-N repulsive force from a parallel
wire 5.00 cm away. What is the direction and
magnitude of the current in the other wire?

53. The wire carrying 400 A to the motor of a

commuter train feels an attractive force of

due to a parallel wire carrying

5.00 A to a headlight. (a) How far apart are the
wires? (b) Are the currents in the same direction?

998

22 • Problems & Exercises

22.11 More Applications of Magnetism

63. Nonnuclear submarines use batteries for power

58. Indicate whether the magnetic field created in

each of the three situations shown in Figure 22.56
is into or out of the page on the left and right of the
current.

FIGURE 22.56

59. What are the directions of the fields in the center of the

loop and coils shown in Figure 22.57?

FIGURE 22.57

60. What are the directions of the currents in the loop and

coils shown in Figure 22.58?

FIGURE 22.58

61. To see why an MRI utilizes iron to increase the
magnetic field created by a coil, calculate the
current needed in a 400-loop-per-meter circular
coil 0.660 m in radius to create a 1.20-T field
(typical of an MRI instrument) at its center with no
iron present. The magnetic field of a proton is
approximately like that of a circular current loop

in radius carrying

.

What is the field at the center of such a loop?
62. Inside a motor, 30.0 A passes through a 250-turn
circular loop that is 10.0 cm in radius. What is the
magnetic field strength created at its center?

Access for free at openstax.org

when submerged. (a) Find the magnetic field 50.0
cm from a straight wire carrying 1200 A from the
batteries to the drive mechanism of a submarine.
(b) What is the field if the wires to and from the
drive mechanism are side by side? (c) Discuss the
effects this could have for a compass on the
submarine that is not shielded.

64. How strong is the magnetic field inside a solenoid
with 10,000 turns per meter that carries 20.0 A?
65. What current is needed in the solenoid described
in Exercise 22.58 to produce a magnetic field
times the Earth’s magnetic field of

?

66. How far from the starter cable of a car, carrying

Assume a long

150 A, must you be to experience a field less than
the Earth’s
straight wire carries the current. (In practice, the
body of your car shields the dashboard compass.)
67. Measurements affect the system being measured,
such as the current loop in Figure 22.53. (a)
Estimate the field the loop creates by calculating
the field at the center of a circular loop 20.0 cm in
diameter carrying 5.00 A. (b) What is the smallest
field strength this loop can be used to measure, if
its field must alter the measured field by less than
0.0100%?

68. Figure 22.59 shows a long straight wire just

. Both lie in

in the straight wire have to create a

touching a loop carrying a current
the same plane. (a) What direction must the
current
field at the center of the loop in the direction
opposite to that created by the loop? (b) What is
the ratio of
that gives zero field strength at
the center of the loop? (c) What is the direction of
the field directly above the loop under this
circumstance?

FIGURE 22.59

69. Find the magnitude and direction of the magnetic
field at the point equidistant from the wires in
Figure 22.55(a), using the rules of vector addition
to sum the contributions from each wire.

70. Find the magnitude and direction of the magnetic
field at the point equidistant from the wires in
Figure 22.55(b), using the rules of vector addition
to sum the contributions from each wire.

22 • Problems & Exercises

999

71. What current is needed in the top wire in Figure

76. Integrated Concepts

22.55(a) to produce a field of zero at the point
equidistant from the wires, if the currents in the
bottom two wires are both 10.0 A into the page?

72. Calculate the size of the magnetic field 20 m

below a high voltage power line. The line carries
450 MW at a voltage of 300,000 V.

73. Integrated Concepts

(a) A pendulum is set up so that its bob (a thin
copper disk) swings between the poles of a
permanent magnet as shown in Figure 22.60.
What is the magnitude and direction of the
magnetic force on the bob at the lowest point in its
path, if it has a positive
released from a height of 30.0 cm above its lowest
point? The magnetic field strength is 1.50 T. (b)
What is the acceleration of the bob at the bottom
of its swing if its mass is 30.0 grams and it is hung
from a flexible string? Be certain to include a free-
body diagram as part of your analysis.

charge and is

To construct a nonmechanical water meter, a
0.500-T magnetic field is placed across the supply
water pipe to a home and the Hall voltage is
recorded. (a) Find the flow rate in liters per second
through a 3.00-cm-diameter pipe if the Hall
voltage is 60.0 mV. (b) What would the Hall
voltage be for the same flow rate through a
10.0-cm-diameter pipe with the same field
applied?

77. Integrated Concepts

(a) Using the values given for an MHD drive in
Exercise 22.59, and assuming the force is
uniformly applied to the fluid, calculate the
pressure created in
fraction of an atmosphere?

(b) Is this a significant

78. Integrated Concepts

(a) Calculate the maximum torque on a 50-turn,
1.50 cm radius circular current loop carrying

in a 0.500-T field. (b) If this coil is to be

used in a galvanometer that reads
scale, what force constant spring must be used, if
it is attached 1.00 cm from the axis of rotation and
is stretched by the

arc moved?

full

79. Integrated Concepts

A current balance used to define the ampere is
designed so that the current through it is constant,
as is the distance between wires. Even so, if the
wires change length with temperature, the force
between them will change. What percent change
in force per degree will occur if the wires are
copper?

FIGURE 22.60

74. Integrated Concepts

? (b) Find the radius of

(a) What voltage will accelerate electrons to a
speed of
curvature of the path of a protonaccelerated
through this potential in a 0.500-T field and
compare this with the radius of curvature of an
electron accelerated through the same potential.

75. Integrated Concepts

Find the radius of curvature of the path of a
25.0-MeV proton moving perpendicularly to the
1.20-T field of a cyclotron.

1000

22 • Problems & Exercises

80. Integrated Concepts

84. Integrated Concepts

(a) Show that the period of the circular orbit of a
charged particle moving perpendicularly to a
uniform magnetic field is
. (b) What
is the frequency ? (c) What is the angular velocity
? Note that these results are independent of the
velocity and radius of the orbit and, hence, of the
energy of the particle. (Figure 22.61.)

FIGURE 22.61 Cyclotrons accelerate charged particles
orbiting in a magnetic field by placing an AC voltage on the
metal Dees, between which the particles move, so that
energy is added twice each orbit. The frequency is constant,
since it is independent of the particle energy—the radius of
the orbit simply increases with energy until the particles
approach the edge and are extracted for various
experiments and applications.

81. Integrated Concepts

A cyclotron accelerates charged particles as
shown in Figure 22.61. Using the results of the
previous problem, calculate the frequency of the
accelerating voltage needed for a proton in a
1.20-T field.

One long straight wire is to be held directly above
another by repulsion between their currents. The
lower wire carries 100 A and the wire 7.50 cm
above it is 10-gauge (2.588 mm diameter) copper
wire. (a) What current must flow in the upper wire,
neglecting the Earth’s field? (b) What is the
smallest current if the Earth’s
is parallel to the ground and is not neglected? (c)
Is the supported wire in a stable or unstable
equilibrium if displaced vertically? If displaced
horizontally?

field

85. Unreasonable Results

(a) Find the charge on a baseball, thrown at 35.0
m/s perpendicular to the Earth’s
field, that experiences a 1.00-N magnetic force.
(b) What is unreasonable about this result? (c)
Which assumption or premise is responsible?

86. Unreasonable Results

A charged particle having mass
(that of a helium atom) moving at
perpendicular to a 1.50-T magnetic field travels in
a circular path of radius 16.0 mm. (a) What is the
charge of the particle? (b) What is unreasonable
about this result? (c) Which assumptions are
responsible?

87. Unreasonable Results

An inventor wants to generate 120-V power by
moving a 1.00-m-long wire perpendicular to the
Earth’s
with which the wire must move. (b) What is
unreasonable about this result? (c) Which
assumption is responsible?

field. (a) Find the speed

82. Integrated Concepts

88. Unreasonable Results

(a) A 0.140-kg baseball, pitched at 40.0 m/s
horizontally and perpendicular to the Earth’s
horizontal
field, has a 100-nC
charge on it. What distance is it deflected from its
path by the magnetic force, after traveling 30.0 m
horizontally? (b) Would you suggest this as a
secret technique for a pitcher to throw curve
balls?

Frustrated by the small Hall voltage obtained in
blood flow measurements, a medical physicist
decides to increase the applied magnetic field
strength to get a 0.500-V output for blood moving
at 30.0 cm/s in a 1.50-cm-diameter vessel. (a)
What magnetic field strength is needed? (b) What
is unreasonable about this result? (c) Which
premise is responsible?

83. Integrated Concepts

89. Unreasonable Results

(a) What is the direction of the force on a wire
carrying a current due east in a location where the
Earth’s field is due north? Both are parallel to the
ground. (b) Calculate the force per meter if the
wire carries 20.0 A and the field strength is

. (c) What diameter copper wire

would have its weight supported by this force? (d)
Calculate the resistance per meter and the voltage
per meter needed.

A surveyor 100 m from a long straight 200-kV DC
power line suspects that its magnetic field may
equal that of the Earth and affect compass
readings. (a) Calculate the current in the wire
needed to create a
field at this
distance. (b) What is unreasonable about this
result? (c) Which assumption or premise is
responsible?

Access for free at openstax.org

90. Construct Your Own Problem

91. Construct Your Own Problem

22 • Problems & Exercises

1001

Consider a mass separator that applies a magnetic
field perpendicular to the velocity of ions and
separates the ions based on the radius of
curvature of their paths in the field. Construct a
problem in which you calculate the magnetic field
strength needed to separate two ions that differ in
mass, but not charge, and have the same initial
velocity. Among the things to consider are the
types of ions, the velocities they can be given
before entering the magnetic field, and a
reasonable value for the radius of curvature of the
paths they follow. In addition, calculate the
separation distance between the ions at the point
where they are detected.

Consider using the torque on a current-carrying
coil in a magnetic field to detect relatively small
magnetic fields (less than the field of the Earth, for
example). Construct a problem in which you
calculate the maximum torque on a current-
carrying loop in a magnetic field. Among the things
to be considered are the size of the coil, the
number of loops it has, the current you pass
through the coil, and the size of the field you wish
to detect. Discuss whether the torque produced is
large enough to be effectively measured. Your
instructor may also wish for you to consider the
effects, if any, of the field produced by the coil on
the surroundings that could affect detection of the
small field.

92. Critical Thinking A magnetic field of

in the positive x-direction exists. Three electrons
pass through the origin, one at a time, each with a
velocity of
. The first electron
passes the origin along the x-axis, the second
electron along the y-axis, and the third at an angle
of
with respect to both the y- and z-axes in the
yz-plane. (a) What is the force acting on each
electron? (b) What is the shape of the path of each
electron? (c) When, if ever, will each electron
return to the origin?

